[Q] Tell me about ['Agriculture', 'began', 'independently']
[A] Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa. At least eleven separate regions of the Old and New World were involved as independent centers of origin. The development of agriculture about 12,000 years ago changed the way humans lived. They switched from nomadic hunter-gatherer lifestyles to permanent settlements and farming. Wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 104,000 years ago. However, domestication did not occur until much later. The earliest evidence of small-scale cultivation of edible grasses is from around 21,000 BC with the Ohalo II people on the shores of the Sea of Galilee. By around 9500 BC, the eight Neolithic founder crops  emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, hulled barley, peas, lentils, bitter vetch, chickpeas, and flax  were cultivated in the Levant. Rye may have been cultivated earlier, but this claim remains controversial. Regardless, ryes spread from Southwest Asia to the Atlantic was independent of the Neolithic founder crop package. Rice was domesticated in China by 6200 BC with earliest known cultivation from 5700 BC, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans. Rice was also independently domesticated in West Africa and cultivated by 1000 BC. Pigs were domesticated in Mesopotamia around 11,000 years ago, followed by sheep. Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and India around 8500 BC. Camels were domesticated late, perhaps around 3000 BC. In subsaharan Africa, sorghum was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 3000 BC, along with pearl millet by 2000 BC. Yams were domesticated in several distinct locations, including West Africa unknown date, and cowpeas by 2500 BC. Rice African rice was also independently domesticated in West Africa and cultivated by 1000 BC. Teff and likely finger millet were domesticated in Ethiopia by 3000 BC, along with noog, ensete, and coffee. Other plant foods domesticated in Africa include watermelon, okra, tamarind and black eyed peas, along with tree crops such as the kola nut and oil palm. Plantains were cultivated in Africa by 3000 BC and bananas by 1500 BC. The helmeted guineafowl was domesticated in West Africa. Sanga cattle was likely also domesticated in North-East Africa, around 7000 BC, and later crossbred with other species. In South America, agriculture began as early as 9000 BC, starting with the cultivation of several species of plants that later became only minor crops. In the Andes of South America, the potato was domesticated between 8000 BC and 5000 BC, along with beans, squash, tomatoes, peanuts, coca, llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs. Cassava was domesticated in the Amazon Basin no later than 7000 BC. Maize Zea mays found its way to South America from Mesoamerica, where wild teosinte was domesticated about 7000 BC and selectively bred to become domestic maize. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 4200 BC another species of cotton was domesticated in Mesoamerica and became by far the most important species of cotton in the textile industry in modern times. Evidence of agriculture in the Eastern United States dates to about 3000 BCE. Several plants were cultivated, later to be replaced by the Three Sisters cultivation of maize, squash, and beans. Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 7000 BC. Bananas were cultivated and hybridized in the same period in Papua New Guinea. In Australia, agriculture was invented at a currently unspecified period, with the oldest eel traps of Budj Bim dating to 6,600 BC and the deployment of several crops ranging from yams to bananas. The Bronze Age, from c. 3300 BC, witnessed the intensification of agriculture in civilizations such as Mesopotamian Sumer, ancient Egypt, ancient Sudan, the Indus Valley civilisation of the Indian subcontinent, ancient China, and ancient Greece. From 100 BC to 1600 AD, world population continued to grow along with land use, as evidenced by the rapid increase in methane emissions from cattle and the cultivation of rice. During the Iron Age and era of classical antiquity, the expansion of ancient Rome, both the Republic and then the Empire, throughout the ancient Mediterranean and Western Europe built upon existing systems of agriculture while also establishing the manorial system that became a bedrock of medieval agriculture. In the Middle Ages, both in Europe and in the Islamic world, agriculture was transformed with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants, including the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and fruit trees such as the orange to Europe by way of Al-Andalus. After the voyages of Christopher Columbus in 1492, the Columbian exchange brought New World crops such as maize, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, and manioc to Europe, and Old World crops such as wheat, barley, rice, and turnips, and livestock including horses, cattle, sheep, and goats to the Americas. Irrigation, crop rotation, and fertilizers were introduced soon after the Neolithic Revolution and developed much further in the past 200 years, starting with the British Agricultural Revolution. Since 1900, agriculture in the developed nations, and to a lesser extent in the developing world, has seen large rises in productivity as human labour has been replaced by mechanization, and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and selective breeding. The Haber-Bosch process allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields. Modern agriculture has raised social, political, and environmental issues including overpopulation, water pollution, biofuels, genetically modified organisms, tariffs and farm subsidies. In response, organic farming developed in the twentieth century as an alternative to the use of synthetic pesticides. Scholars have developed a number of hypotheses to explain the historical origins of agriculture. Studies of the transition from hunter-gatherer to agricultural societies indicate an antecedent period of intensification and increasing sedentism examples are the Natufian culture in the Levant, and the Early Chinese Neolithic in China. Current models indicate that wild stands that had been harvested previously started to be planted, but were not immediately domesticated. Localised climate change is the favoured explanation for the origins of agriculture in the Levant. When major climate change took place after the last ice age c. 11,000 BC, much of the earth became subject to long dry seasons. These conditions favoured annual plants which die off in the long dry season, leaving a dormant seed or tuber. An abundance of readily storable wild grains and pulses enabled hunter-gatherers in some areas to form the first settled villages at this time. Across Western Eurasia it was not until approximately 4,000 BC that farming societies completely replaced hunter-gatherers. These technologically advanced societies expanded faster in areas with less forest, pushing hunter-gatherers into denser woodlands. Only the middle-late Bronze Age and Iron Age societies were able to fully replace hunter-gatherers in their final stronghold located in the most densely forested areas. Unlike their Bronze and Iron Age counterparts, Neolithic societies couldnt establish themselves in dense forests, and Copper Age societies had only limited success. Early people began altering communities of flora and fauna for their own benefit through means such as fire-stick farming and forest gardening very early. Wild grains have been collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago, and possibly much longer. Exact dates are hard to determine, as people collected and ate seeds before domesticating them, and plant characteristics may have changed during this period without human selection. An example is the semi-tough rachis and larger seeds of cereals from just after the Younger Dryas about 9500 BC in the early Holocene in the Levant region of the Fertile Crescent. Monophyletic characteristics were attained without any human intervention, implying that apparent domestication of the cereal rachis could have occurred quite naturally. Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe and included a diverse range of taxa. At least 11 separate regions of the Old and New World were involved as independent centers of origin. Some of the earliest known domestications were of animals. Domestic pigs had multiple centres of origin in Eurasia, including Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago. Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 11,000 BC and 9000 BC. Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and India around 8500 BC. Camels were domesticated relatively late, perhaps around 3000 BC. It was not until after 9500 BC that the eight so-called founder crops of agriculture appear first emmer and einkorn wheat, then hulled barley, peas, lentils, bitter vetch, chick peas and flax. These eight crops occur more or less simultaneously on Pre-Pottery Neolithic B PPNB sites in the Levant, although wheat was the first to be grown and harvested on a significant scale. At around the same time 9400 BC, parthenocarpic fig trees were domesticated. Domesticated rye occurs in small quantities at some Neolithic sites in Asia Minor Turkey, such as the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B c. 7600  c. 6000 BC Can Hasan III near Çatalhöyük, but is otherwise absent until the Bronze Age of central Europe, c. 18001500 BC. Claims of much earlier cultivation of rye, at the Epipalaeolithic site of Tell Abu Hureyra in the Euphrates valley of northern Syria, remain controversial. Critics point to inconsistencies in the radiocarbon dates, and identifications based solely on grain, rather than on chaff. By 8000 BC, farming was entrenched on the banks of the Nile. About this time, agriculture was developed independently in the Far East, probably in China, with rice rather than wheat as the primary crop. Maize was domesticated from the wild grass teosinte in southern Mexico by 6700 BC. The potato 8000 BC, tomato, pepper 4000 BC, squash 8000 BC and several varieties of bean 8000 BC onwards were domesticated in the New World. Agriculture was independently developed on the island of New Guinea. Banana cultivation of Musa acuminata, including hybridization, dates back to 5000 BC, and possibly to 8000 BC, in Papua New Guinea. Bees were kept for honey in the Middle East around 7000 BC. Archaeological evidence from various sites on the Iberian peninsula suggest the domestication of plants and animals between 6000 and 4500 BC. The Céide Fields, located in Ireland consist of extensive tracts of land enclosed by stone walls, these walls date to 3500 BC and is the oldest known field systems in europe. The horse was domesticated in the Pontic steppe around 4000 BC In Siberia. Cannabis was in use in China in Neolithic times and may have been domesticated there it was in use both as a fibre for ropemaking and as a medicine in Ancient Egypt by about 2350 BC. In northern China, millet was domesticated by early Sino-Tibetan speakers at around 8000 to 6000 BC, becoming the main crop of the Yellow River basin by 5500 BC. They were followed by mung, soy and azuki beans. In southern China, rice was domesticated in the Yangtze River basin at around 11,500 to 6200 BC, along with the development of wetland agriculture, by early Austronesian and Hmong-Mien-speakers. Other food plants were also harvested, including acorns, water chestnuts, and foxnuts. Rice cultivation was later spread to Maritime Southeast Asia by the Austronesian expansion, starting at around 3,500 to 2,000 BC. This migration event also saw the introduction of cultivated and domesticated food plants from Taiwan, Maritime Southeast Asia, and New Guinea into the Pacific Islands as canoe plants. Contact with Sri Lanka and Southern India by Austronesian sailors also led to an exchange of food plants which later became the origin of the valuable spice trade. In the 1st millennium AD, Austronesian sailors also settled Madagascar and the Comoros, bringing Southeast Asian and South Asian food plants with them to the East African coast, including bananas and rice. Rice was also spread southwards into Mainland Southeast Asia by around 2000 to 1500 BC by the migrations of the early Austroasiatic and Kra-Dai-speakers. In the Sahel region of Africa, sorghum was domesticated by 3000 BC in Sudan and pearl millet by 2500 BC in Mali. Kola nut and coffee were also domesticated in Africa. In New Guinea, ancient Papuan peoples began practicing agriculture around 7000 BC, domesticating sugarcane and taro. In the Indus Valley from the eighth millennium BC onwards at Mehrgarh, 2-row and 6-row barley were cultivated, along with einkorn, emmer, and durum wheats, and dates. In the earliest levels of Merhgarh, wild game such as gazelle, swamp deer, blackbuck, chital, wild ass, wild goat, wild sheep, boar, and nilgai were all hunted for food. These are successively replaced by domesticated sheep, goats, and humped zebu cattle by the fifth millennium BC, indicating the gradual transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture. Maize and squash were domesticated in Mesoamerica potatoes in South America, and sunflowers in the Eastern Woodlands of North America. Sumerian farmers grew the cereals barley and wheat, starting to live in villages from about 8000 BC. Given the low rainfall of the region, agriculture relied on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Irrigation canals leading from the rivers permitted the growth of cereals in large enough quantities to support cities. The first ploughs appear in pictographs from Uruk around 3000 BC seed-ploughs that funneled seed into the ploughed furrow appear on seals around 2300 BC. Vegetable crops included chickpeas, lentils, peas, beans, onions, garlic, lettuce, leeks and mustard. They grew fruits including dates, grapes, apples, melons, and figs. Alongside their farming, Sumerians also caught fish and hunted fowl and gazelle. The meat of sheep, goats, cows and poultry was eaten, mainly by the elite. Fish was preserved by drying, salting and smoking. The civilization of Ancient Egypt was indebted to the Nile River and its dependable seasonal flooding. The rivers predictability and the fertile soil allowed the Egyptians to build an empire on the basis of great agricultural wealth. Egyptians were among the first peoples to practice agriculture on a large scale, starting in the pre-dynastic period from the end of the Paleolithic into the Neolithic, between around 10,000 BC and 4000 BC. This was made possible with the development of basin irrigation. Their staple food crops were grains such as wheat and barley, alongside industrial crops such as flax and papyrus. Archaeological evidence also suggests that the spread of agriculture in Egypt was facilitated by farming communities associated with the playa lakes of the Sahara some 6,500 years ago. Jujube was domesticated in the Indian subcontinent by 9000 BC. Barley and wheat cultivation  along with the domestication of cattle, primarily sheep and goats  followed in Mehrgarh culture by 80006000 BC. This period also saw the first domestication of the elephant. Pastoral farming in India included threshing, planting crops in rows  either of two or of six  and storing grain in granaries. Cotton was cultivated by the 5th4th millennium BC. By the 5th millennium BC, agricultural communities became widespread in Kashmir. Irrigation was developed in the Indus Valley Civilisation by around 4500 BC. The size and prosperity of the Indus civilization grew as a result of this innovation, leading to more thoroughly planned settlements which used drainage and sewers. Archeological evidence of an animal-drawn plough dates back to 2500 BC in the Indus Valley Civilization. Records from the Warring States, Qin dynasty, and Han dynasty provide a picture of early Chinese agriculture from the 5th century BC to 2nd century AD which included a nationwide granary system and widespread use of sericulture. An important early Chinese book on agriculture is the Qimin Yaoshu of AD 535, written by Jia Sixie. Jias writing style was straightforward and lucid relative to the elaborate and allusive writing typical of the time. Jias book was also very long, with over one hundred thousand written Chinese characters, and it quoted many other Chinese books that were written previously, but no longer survive. The contents of Jias 6th century book include sections on land preparation, seeding, cultivation, orchard management, forestry, and animal husbandry. The book also includes peripherally related content covering trade and culinary uses for crops. The work and the style in which it was written proved influential on later Chinese agronomists, such as Wang Zhen and his groundbreaking Nong Shu of 1313. For agricultural purposes, the Chinese had innovated the hydraulic-powered trip hammer by the 1st century BC. Although it found other purposes, its main function to pound, decorticate, and polish grain that otherwise would have been done manually. The Chinese also began using the square-pallet chain pump by the 1st century AD, powered by a waterwheel or oxen pulling an on a system of mechanical wheels. Although the chain pump found use in public works of providing water for urban and palatial pipe systems, it was used largely to lift water from a lower to higher elevation in filling irrigation canals and channels for farmland. By the end of the Han dynasty in the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs had been developed with iron ploughshares and mouldboards. These slowly spread west, revolutionizing farming in Northern Europe by the 10th century. Thomas Glick, however, argues for a development of the Chinese plough as late as the 9th century, implying its spread east from similar designs known in Italy by the 7th century. Asian rice was domesticated 8,20013,500 years ago in China, with a single genetic origin from the wild rice Oryza rufipogon, in the Pearl River valley region of China. Rice cultivation then spread to South and Southeast Asia. The major cereal crops of the ancient Mediterranean region were wheat, emmer, and barley, while common vegetables included peas, beans, fava, and olives, dairy products came mostly from sheep and goats, and meat, which was consumed on rare occasion for most people, usually consisted of pork, beef, and lamb. Agriculture in ancient Greece was hindered by the topography of mainland Greece that only allowed for roughly 10 of the land to be cultivated properly, necessitating the specialised exportation of oil and wine and importation of grains from Thrace centered in what is now Bulgaria and the Greek colonies of Pontic Greeks near the Black Sea. During the Hellenistic period, the Ptolemaic Empire controlled Egypt, Cyprus, Phoenicia, and Cyrenaica, major grain-producing regions that mainland Greeks depended on for subsistence, while the Ptolemaic grain market also played a critical role in the rise of the Roman Republic. In the Seleucid Empire, Mesopotamia was a crucial area for the production of wheat, while nomadic animal husbandry was also practiced in other parts. In the Greco-Roman world of Classical antiquity, Roman agriculture was built on techniques originally pioneered by the Sumerians, transmitted to them by subsequent cultures, with a specific emphasis on the cultivation of crops for trade and export. The Romans laid the groundwork for the manorial economic system, involving serfdom, which flourished in the Middle Ages. The farm sizes in Rome can be divided into three categories. Small farms were from 18 to 88 iugera one iugerum is equal to about 0.65 acre. Medium-sized farms were from 80 to 500 iugera singular iugerum. Large estates called latifundia were over 500 iugera. The Romans had four systems of farm management direct work by the owner and his family slaves doing work under the supervision of slave managers tenant farming or sharecropping in which the owner and a tenant divide up a farms produce and situations in which a farm was leased to a tenant. Agricultural history took a different path from the Old World as the Americas lacked large-seeded, easily domesticated grains such as wheat and barley and large domestic animals that could be used for agricultural labor. Rather than the practice which developed in the Old World of sowing a field with a single crop, pre-historic American agriculture usually consisted of cultivating many crops close to each other utilizing only hand labor. Moreover, agricultural areas in the Americas lacked the uniformity of the eastwest area of Mediterranean and semi-arid climates in southern Europe and southwestern Asia, but instead had a northsouth pattern with a variety of different climatic zones in close proximity to each other. This fostered the domestication of many different plants. At the time of first contact between the Europeans and the Americans, the Europeans practiced extensive agriculture, based on the plough and draught animals, with tenants under landlords, but also forced labor or slavery, while the Indigenous peoples of the Americas practiced intensive agriculture, based on human labour. Europeans wanted control of land for the grazing of their livestock and property rights for the control of production. Though they were impressed with the productivity of traditional farming techniques, they saw no connection to their system and were dismissive of Native American practices as gardening rather than a commercializable enterprise. Due to several thousand years of selective breeding, maize, the hemispheres most important crop, was more productive than Old World grain crops. Maize produced two and one-half times more calories per acre than wheat and barley. The earliest known areas of possible agriculture in the Americas dating to about 9000 BC are in Colombia, near present-day Pereira, and by the Las Vegas culture in Ecuador on the Santa Elena peninsula. The plants cultivated or manipulated by humans were lerén Calathea allouia, arrowroot Maranta arundinacea, squash Cucurbita species, and bottle gourd Lagenaria siceraria. All are plants of humid climates and their existence at this time on the semi-arid Santa Elena peninsula may be evidence that they were transplanted there from more humid environments. In another study, this area of South America was identified as one of the four oldest places of origin for agriculture, along with the Fertile Crescent, China, and Mesoamerica, dated between 6200 BC and 10000 BC. To facilitate comprehension by readers, Radiocarbon calibrated BP dates in the above sources have been converted to BC. In the Andes region, with civilizations including the Inca, the major crop was the potato, domesticated between 8000 and 5000 BC. Coca, still a major crop to this day, was domesticated in the Andes, as were the peanut, tomato, tobacco, and pineapple. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 4200 BC. Animals were also domesticated, including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs. The people of the Inca Empire of South America grew large surpluses of food which they stored in buildings called Qullqas. The most important crop domesticated in the Amazon Basin and tropical lowlands was probably cassava, Manihot esculenta, which was domesticated before 7000 BCE, likely in the Rondônia and Mato Grosso states of Brazil. The Guaitecas Archipelago in modern Chile was the southern limit of Pre-Hispanic agriculture near 44 South latitude, as noted by the mention of the cultivation of Chiloé potatoes by a Spanish expedition in 1557. In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte was transformed through human selection into the ancestor of modern maize, about 7,000 BC. It gradually spread across North America and to South America and was the most important crop of Native Americans at the time of European exploration. Other Mesoamerican crops include hundreds of varieties of locally domesticated squash and beans, while cocoa, also domesticated in the region, was a major crop. The turkey, one of the most important poultry birds, was probably domesticated in Mexico or the U.S. Southwest. In Mesoamerica, the Aztecs were active farmers and had an agriculturally focused economy. The land around Lake Texcoco was fertile, but not large enough to produce the amount of food needed for the population of their expanding empire. The Aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands, also known as floating gardens. The Mayas between 400 BC to 900 AD used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland on the Yucatán Peninsula. The indigenous people of the Eastern U.S. domesticated numerous crops. Sunflowers, tobacco, varieties of squash and Chenopodium, as well as crops no longer grown, including marsh elder and little barley. Wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar were harvested. The domesticated strawberry is a hybrid of a Chilean and a North American species, developed by breeding in Europe and North America. Two major crops, pecans and Concord grapes, were used extensively in prehistoric times but do not appear to have been domesticated until the 19th century. The indigenous people in what is now California and the Pacific Northwest practiced various forms of forest gardening and fire-stick farming in the forests, grasslands, mixed woodlands, and wetlands, ensuring that desired food and medicine plants continued to be available. The natives controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology which prevented larger, catastrophic fires and sustained a low-density agriculture in loose rotation a sort of wild permaculture. A system of companion planting called the Three Sisters was developed in North America. Three crops that complemented each other were planted together winter squash, maize corn, and climbing beans typically tepary beans or common beans. The maize provides a structure for the beans to climb, eliminating the need for poles. The beans provide the nitrogen to the soil that the other plants use, and the squash spreads along the ground, blocking the sunlight, helping prevent the establishment of weeds. The squash leaves also act as a living mulch. In the Sahel region, civilizations such as the Mali and Songhai empires cultivated sorghum and pearl millet, which were domesticated between 3000 and 2500 BC. The donkey was domesticated in Nubia at approximately 5000 BC. Archaeological evidence suggests that Sanga cattle may have been independently domesticated in East Africa at around 1600 BC. In the tropical region of West Africa, crops such as black-eyed peas, Sea Island red peas, yams, kola nuts, Jollof rice and kokoro were domesticated between 3000 and 1000 BC. The coastal region of West Africa is often referred to as the Yam Belt, due to its high production of yams. The guineafowl is a poultry bird that was domesticated in West Africa, and while the time of the guineafowls domestication remains unclear, there is evidence that it was present in Ancient Greece during the 5th century BC. Several species of coffee were also domesticated throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, with Coffea arabica originating in Ethiopia and serving as the main production of modern-day coffee since the late 15th century. Indigenous Australians were predominately nomadic hunter-gatherers. Due to the policy of terra nullius, Aboriginals were regarded as not having been capable of sustained agriculture. However, the current consensus is that various agricultural methods were employed by the indigenous people. In two regions of Central Australia, the central west coast and eastern central Australia, forms of agriculture were practiced. People living in permanent settlements of over 200 residents sowed or planted on a large scale and stored the harvested food. The Nhanda and Amangu of the central west coast grew yams Dioscorea hastifolia, while various groups in eastern central Australia the Corners Region planted and harvested bush onions yaua  Cyperus bulbosus, native millet cooly, tindil  Panicum decompositum and a sporocarp, ngardu Marsilea drummondii. 281304 Indigenous Australians used systematic burning, fire-stick farming, to enhance natural productivity. In the 1970s and 1980s archaeological research in south west Victoria established that the Gunditjmara and other groups had developed sophisticated eel farming and fish trapping systems over a period of nearly 5,000 years. The archaeologist Harry Lourandos suggested in the 1980s that there was evidence of intensification in progress across Australia, a process that appeared to have continued through the preceding 5,000 years. These concepts led the historian Bill Gammage to argue that in effect the whole continent was a managed landscape. Torres Strait Islanders are now known to have planted bananas. In New Guinea, archaeological evidence suggests that agriculture independently emerged around 7,000 years ago with the domestication of crops such as bananas and taro. Pigs and chickens were imported to New Guinea, which were later innovated by other Pacific Island nations, such as those in Polynesia. The Middle Ages saw further improvements in agriculture. Monasteries spread throughout Europe and became important centers for the collection of knowledge related to agriculture and forestry. The manorial system allowed large landowners to control their land and its laborers, in the form of peasants or serfs. During the medieval period, the Arab world was critical in the exchange of crops and technology between the European, Asia and African continents. Besides transporting numerous crops, they introduced the concept of summer irrigation to Europe and developed the beginnings of the plantation system of sugarcane growing through the use of slaves for intensive cultivation. By AD 900, developments in iron smelting allowed for increased production in Europe, leading to developments in the production of agricultural implements such as ploughs, hand tools and horse shoes. The carruca heavy plough improved on the earlier scratch plough, with the adoption of the Chinese mouldboard plough to turn over the heavy, wet soils of northern Europe. This led to the clearing of northern European forests and an increase in agricultural production, which in turn led to an increase in population. At the same time, some farmers in Europe moved from a two field crop rotation to a three-field crop rotation in which one field of three was left fallow every year. This resulted in increased productivity and nutrition, as the change in rotations permitted nitrogen-fixing legumes such as peas, lentils and beans. Improved horse harnesses and the whippletree further improved cultivation. Watermills were introduced by the Romans, but were improved throughout the Middle Ages, along with windmills, and used to grind grains into flour, to cut wood and to process flax and wool. Crops included wheat, rye, barley and oats. Peas, beans, and vetches became common from the 13th century onward as a fodder crop for animals and also for their nitrogen-fixation fertilizing properties. Crop yields peaked in the 13th century, and stayed more or less steady until the 18th century. Though the limitations of medieval farming were once thought to have provided a ceiling for the population growth in the Middle Ages, recent studies have shown that the technology of medieval agriculture was always sufficient for the needs of the people under normal circumstances, and that it was only during exceptionally harsh times, such as the terrible weather of 131517, that the needs of the population could not be met. From the 8th century to the 14th century, the Islamic world underwent a transformation in agricultural practice, described by the historian Andrew Watson as the Arab agricultural revolution. This transformation was driven by a number of factors including the diffusion of many crops and plants along Muslim trade routes, the spread of more advanced farming techniques, and an agricultural-economic system which promoted increased yields and efficiency. The shift in agricultural practice changed the economy, population distribution, vegetation cover, agricultural production, population levels, urban growth, the distribution of the labour force, cooking, diet, and clothing across the Islamic world. Muslim traders covered much of the Old World, and trade enabled the diffusion of many crops, plants and farming techniques across the region, as well as the adaptation of crops, plants and techniques from beyond the Islamic world. This diffusion introduced major crops to Europe by way of Al-Andalus, along with the techniques for their cultivation and cuisine. Sugar cane, rice, and cotton were among the major crops transferred, along with citrus and other fruit trees, nut trees, vegetables such as aubergine, spinach and chard, and the use of imported spices such as cumin, coriander, nutmeg and cinnamon. Intensive irrigation, crop rotation, and agricultural manuals were widely adopted. Irrigation, partly based on Roman technology, made use of noria water wheels, water mills, dams and reservoirs. After 1492, a global exchange of previously local crops and livestock breeds occurred. Maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes and manioc were the key crops that spread from the New World to the Old, while varieties of wheat, barley, rice and turnips traveled from the Old World to the New. There had been few livestock species in the New World, with horses, cattle, sheep and goats being completely unknown before their arrival with Old World settlers. Crops moving in both directions across the Atlantic Ocean caused population growth around the world and a lasting effect on many cultures in the Early Modern period. Maize and cassava were introduced from Brazil into Africa by Portuguese traders in the 16th century, becoming staple foods, replacing native African crops. After its introduction from South America to Spain in the late 1500s, the potato became a staple crop throughout Europe by the late 1700s. The potato allowed farmers to produce more food, and initially added variety to the European diet. The increased supply of food reduced disease, increased births and reduced mortality, causing a population boom throughout the British Empire, the US and Europe. The introduction of the potato also brought about the first intensive use of fertilizer, in the form of guano imported to Europe from Peru, and the first artificial pesticide, in the form of an arsenic compound used to fight Colorado potato beetles. Before the adoption of the potato as a major crop, the dependence on grain had caused repetitive regional and national famines when the crops failed, including 17 major famines in England between 1523 and 1623. The resulting dependence on the potato however caused the European Potato Failure, a disastrous crop failure from disease that resulted in widespread famine and the death of over one million people in Ireland alone. Between the 17th century and the mid-19th century, Britain saw a large increase in agricultural productivity and net output. New agricultural practices like enclosure, mechanization, four-field crop rotation to maintain soil nutrients, and selective breeding enabled an unprecedented population growth to 5.7 million in 1750, freeing up a significant percentage of the workforce, and thereby helped drive the Industrial Revolution. The productivity of wheat went up from 19 US bushels 670 L 150 US dry gal 150 imp gal per acre in 1720 to around 30 US bushels 1,100 L 240 US dry gal 230 imp gal by 1840, marking a major turning point in history. Advice on more productive techniques for farming began to appear in England in the mid-17th century, from writers such as Samuel Hartlib, Walter Blith and others. The main problem in sustaining agriculture in one place for a long time was the depletion of nutrients, most importantly nitrogen levels, in the soil. To allow the soil to regenerate, productive land was often let fallow and, in some places, crop rotation was used. The Dutch four-field rotation system was popularised by the British agriculturist Charles Townshend in the 18th century. The system wheat, turnips, barley and clover opened up a fodder crop and grazing crop allowing livestock to be bred year-round. The use of clover was especially important as the legume roots replenished soil nitrates. The mechanisation and rationalisation of agriculture was another important factor. Robert Bakewell and Thomas Coke introduced selective breeding and initiated a process of inbreeding to maximise desirable traits from the mid 18th century, such as the New Leicester sheep. Machines were invented to improve the efficiency of various agricultural operation, such as Jethro Tulls seed drill of 1701 that mechanised seeding at the correct depth and spacing and Andrew Meikles threshing machine of 1784. Ploughs were steadily improved, from Joseph Foljambes Rotherham iron plough in 1730 to James Smalls improved Scots Plough metal in 1763. In 1789 Ransomes, Sims  Jefferies was producing 86 plough models for different soils. Powered farm machinery began with Richard Trevithicks stationary steam engine, used to drive a threshing machine, in 1812. Mechanisation spread to additional farm uses throughout the 19th century. The first petrol-driven tractor was built in America by John Froelich in 1892. John Bennet Lawes began the scientific investigation of fertilization at the Rothamsted Experimental Station in 1843. He investigated the impact of inorganic and organic fertilizers on crop yield and founded one of the first artificial fertilizer manufacturing factories in 1842. Fertilizer, in the shape of sodium nitrate deposits in Chile, was imported to Britain by John Thomas North as well as guano birds droppings. The first commercial process for fertilizer production was the obtaining of phosphate from the dissolution of coprolites in sulphuric acid. Dan Albone constructed the first commercially successful gasoline-powered general-purpose tractor in 1901, and the 1923 International Harvester Farmall tractor marked a major point in the replacement of draft animals particularly horses with machines. Since that time, self-propelled mechanical harvesters combines, planters, transplanters and other equipment have been developed, further revolutionizing agriculture. These inventions allowed farming tasks to be done with a speed and on a scale previously impossible, leading modern farms to output much greater volumes of high-quality produce per land unit. The Haber-Bosch method for synthesizing ammonium nitrate represented a major breakthrough and allowed crop yields to overcome previous constraints. It was first patented by German chemist Fritz Haber. In 1910 Carl Bosch, while working for German chemical company BASF, successfully commercialized the process and secured further patents. In the years after World War II, the use of synthetic fertilizer increased rapidly, in sync with the increasing world population. Collective farming was widely practiced in the Soviet Union, the Eastern Bloc countries, China, and Vietnam, starting in the 1930s in the Soviet Union one result was the Soviet famine of 193233. Another consequence occurred during the Great Leap Forward in China initiated by Mao Tse-tung that resulted in the Great Chinese Famine from 1959 to 1961 and ultimately reshaped the thinking of Deng Xiaoping. In the past century agriculture has been characterized by increased productivity, the substitution of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labour, water pollution, and farm subsidies. Other applications of scientific research since 1950 in agriculture include gene manipulation, hydroponics, and the development of economically viable biofuels such as ethanol. The number of people involved in farming in industrial countries fell radically from 24 percent of the American population to 1.5 percent in 2002. The number of farms also decreased, and their ownership became more concentrated for example, between 1967 and 2002, one million pig farms in America consolidated into 114,000, with 80 percent of the production on factory farms. According to the Worldwatch Institute, 74 percent of the worlds poultry, 43 percent of beef, and 68 percent of eggs are produced this way. Famines however continued to sweep the globe through the 20th century. Through the effects of climatic events, government policy, war and crop failure, millions of people died in each of at least ten famines between the 1920s and the 1990s. The Green Revolution was a series of research, development, and technology transfer initiatives between the 1940s and the late 1970s. It increased agriculture production around the world, especially from the late 1960s. The initiatives, led by Norman Borlaug and credited with saving over a billion people from starvation, involved the development of high-yielding varieties of cereal grains, expansion of irrigation infrastructure, modernization of management techniques, distribution of hybridized seeds, synthetic fertilizers, and pesticides to farmers. Synthetic nitrogen, mined rock phosphate, pesticides, and mechanization have greatly increased crop yields in the early 20th century. Increased supply of grains has also led to cheaper livestock. Further, global yield increases were experienced later in the 20th century when high-yield varieties of common staple grains such as rice, wheat, and corn were introduced as a part of the Green Revolution. The Green Revolution exported the technologies including pesticides and synthetic nitrogen of the developed world to the developing world. Thomas Malthus famously predicted that the Earth would not be able to support its growing population. Still, technologies such as the Green Revolution have allowed the world to produce a food surplus. Although the Green Revolution significantly increased rice yields in Asia, yield leveled off. The genetic yield potential has increased for wheat, but the yield potential for rice has not increased since 1966, and the yield potential for maize has barely increased in 35 years. It takes only a decade or two for herbicide-resistant weeds to emerge, and insects become resistant to insecticides within about a decade, delayed somewhat by crop rotation. For most of its history, agriculture has been organic, without synthetic fertilisers or pesticides, and without GMOs. With the advent of chemical agriculture, Rudolf Steiner called for farming without synthetic pesticides, and his Agriculture Course of 1924 laid the foundation for biodynamic agriculture. Lord Northbourne developed these ideas and presented his manifesto of organic farming in 1940. This became a worldwide movement, and organic farming is now practiced in many countries.
 Agriculture encompasses crop and livestock production, aquaculture, and forestry for food and non-food products. Agriculture was a key factor in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated species created food surpluses that enabled people to live in the cities. While humans started gathering grains at least 105,000 years ago, nascent farmers only began planting them around 11,500 years ago. Sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were domesticated around 10,000 years ago. Plants were independently cultivated in at least 11 regions of the world. In the 20th century, industrial agriculture based on large-scale monocultures came to dominate agricultural output. As of 2021, small farms produce about one-third of the worlds food, but large farms are prevalent. The largest 1 of farms in the world are greater than 50 hectares 120 acres and operate more than 70 of the worlds farmland. Nearly 40 of agricultural land is found on farms larger than 1,000 hectares 2,500 acres. However, five of every six farms in the world consist of fewer than 2 hectares 4.9 acres, and take up only around 12 of all agricultural land. Farms and farming greatly influence rural economics and greatly shape rural society, affecting both the direct agricultural workforce and broader businesses that support the farms and farming populations. The major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods, fibers, fuels, and raw materials such as rubber. Food classes include cereals grains, vegetables, fruits, cooking oils, meat, milk, eggs, and fungi. Global agricultural production amounts to approximately 11 billion tonnes of food, 32 million tonnes of natural fibers and 4 billion m3 of wood. However, around 14 of the worlds food is lost from production before reaching the retail level. Modern agronomy, plant breeding, agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers, and technological developments have sharply increased crop yields, but also contributed to ecological and environmental damage. Selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal welfare and environmental damage. Environmental issues include contributions to climate change, depletion of aquifers, deforestation, antibiotic resistance, and other agricultural pollution. Agriculture is both a cause of and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation, and climate change, all of which can cause decreases in crop yield. Genetically modified organisms are widely used, although some countries ban them.  The word agriculture is a late Middle English adaptation of Latin agricultūra, from ager field and cultūra cultivation or growing. While agriculture usually refers to human activities, certain species of ant, termite and beetle have been cultivating crops for up to 60 million years. Agriculture is defined with varying scopes, in its broadest sense using natural resources to produce commodities which maintain life, including food, fiber, forest products, horticultural crops, and their related services. Thus defined, it includes arable farming, horticulture, animal husbandry and forestry, but horticulture and forestry are in practice often excluded. It may also be broadly decomposed into plant agriculture, which concerns the cultivation of useful plants, and animal agriculture, the production of agricultural animals. The development of agriculture enabled the human population to grow many times larger than could be sustained by hunting and gathering. Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centers of origin. Wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago. In the Paleolithic Levant, 23,000 years ago, cereals cultivation of emmer, barley, and oats has been observed near the sea of Galilee. Rice was domesticated in China between 11,500 and 6,200 BC with the earliest known cultivation from 5,700 BC, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans. Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago. Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and Pakistan some 10,500 years ago. Pig production emerged in Eurasia, including Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago. In the Andes of South America, the potato was domesticated between 10,000 and 7,000 years ago, along with beans, coca, llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs. Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 9,000 years ago. Sorghum was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 7,000 years ago. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated in Eurasia. In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte was bred into maize corn from 10,000 to 6,000 years ago. The horse was domesticated in the Eurasian Steppes around 3500 BC. Scholars have offered multiple hypotheses to explain the historical origins of agriculture. Studies of the transition from hunter-gatherer to agricultural societies indicate an initial period of intensification and increasing sedentism examples are the Natufian culture in the Levant, and the Early Chinese Neolithic in China. Then, wild stands that had previously been harvested started to be planted, and gradually came to be domesticated. In Eurasia, the Sumerians started to live in villages from about 8,000 BC, relying on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and a canal system for irrigation. Ploughs appear in pictographs around 3,000 BC seed-ploughs around 2,300 BC. Farmers grew wheat, barley, vegetables such as lentils and onions, and fruits including dates, grapes, and figs. Ancient Egyptian agriculture relied on the Nile River and its seasonal flooding. Farming started in the predynastic period at the end of the Paleolithic, after 10,000 BC. Staple food crops were grains such as wheat and barley, alongside industrial crops such as flax and papyrus. In India, wheat, barley and jujube were domesticated by 9,000 BC, soon followed by sheep and goats. Cattle, sheep and goats were domesticated in Mehrgarh culture by 8,0006,000 BC. Cotton was cultivated by the 5th4th millennium BC. Archeological evidence indicates an animal-drawn plough from 2,500 BC in the Indus Valley civilization. In China, from the 5th century BC, there was a nationwide granary system and widespread silk farming. Water-powered grain mills were in use by the 1st century BC, followed by irrigation. By the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs had been developed with iron ploughshares and mouldboards. These spread westwards across Eurasia. Asian rice was domesticated 8,20013,500 years ago  depending on the molecular clock estimate that is used on the Pearl River in southern China with a single genetic origin from the wild rice Oryza rufipogon. In Greece and Rome, the major cereals were wheat, emmer, and barley, alongside vegetables including peas, beans, and olives. Sheep and goats were kept mainly for dairy products. In the Americas, crops domesticated in Mesoamerica apart from teosinte include squash, beans, and cacao. Cocoa was domesticated by the Mayo Chinchipe of the upper Amazon around 3,000 BC. The turkey was probably domesticated in Mexico or the American Southwest. The Aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands. The Mayas used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland from 400 BC. In South America agriculture may have begun about 9000 BC with the domestication of squash Cucurbita and other plants. Coca was domesticated in the Andes, as were the peanut, tomato, tobacco, and pineapple. Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 3,600 BC. Animals including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs were domesticated there. In North America, the indigenous people of the East domesticated crops such as sunflower, tobacco, squash and Chenopodium. Wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar were harvested. The domesticated strawberry is a hybrid of a Chilean and a North American species, developed by breeding in Europe and North America. The indigenous people of the Southwest and the Pacific Northwest practiced forest gardening and fire-stick farming. The natives controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology that sustained a low-density agriculture in loose rotation a sort of wild permaculture. A system of companion planting called the Three Sisters was developed in North America. The three crops were winter squash, maize, and climbing beans. Indigenous Australians, long supposed to have been nomadic hunter-gatherers, practiced systematic burning, possibly to enhance natural productivity in fire-stick farming. Scholars have pointed out that hunter-gatherers need a productive environment to support gathering without cultivation. Because the forests of New Guinea have few food plants, early humans may have used selective burning to increase the productivity of the wild karuka fruit trees to support the hunter-gatherer way of life. The Gunditjmara and other groups developed eel farming and fish trapping systems from some 5,000 years ago. There is evidence of intensification across the whole continent over that period. In two regions of Australia, the central west coast and eastern central, early farmers cultivated yams, native millet, and bush onions, possibly in permanent settlements. In the Middle Ages, compared to the Roman period, agriculture in Western Europe became more focused on self-sufficiency. The agricultural population under feudalism was typically organized into manors consisting of several hundred or more acres of land presided over by a lord of the manor with a Roman Catholic church and priest. Thanks to the exchange with the Al-Andalus where the Arab Agricultural Revolution was underway, European agriculture transformed, with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants, including the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and fruit trees such as the orange. After 1492, the Columbian exchange brought New World crops such as maize, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, and manioc to Europe, and Old World crops such as wheat, barley, rice, and turnips, and livestock including horses, cattle, sheep and goats to the Americas. Irrigation, crop rotation, and fertilizers advanced from the 17th century with the British Agricultural Revolution, allowing global population to rise significantly. Since 1900, agriculture in developed nations, and to a lesser extent in the developing world, has seen large rises in productivity as mechanization replaces human labor, and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and selective breeding. The Haber-Bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining a further increase in global population. Modern agriculture has raised or encountered ecological, political, and economic issues including water pollution, biofuels, genetically modified organisms, tariffs and farm subsidies, leading to alternative approaches such as the organic movement. Unsustainable farming practices in North America led to the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Pastoralism involves managing domesticated animals. In nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture, fodder, and water. This type of farming is practiced in arid and semi-arid regions of Sahara, Central Asia and some parts of India. In shifting cultivation, a small area of forest is cleared by cutting and burning the trees. The cleared land is used for growing crops for a few years until the soil becomes too infertile, and the area is abandoned. Another patch of land is selected and the process is repeated. This type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly. This practice is used in Northeast India, Southeast Asia, and the Amazon Basin. Subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy family or local needs alone, with little left over for transport elsewhere. It is intensively practiced in Monsoon Asia and South-East Asia. An estimated 2.5 billion subsistence farmers worked in 2018, cultivating about 60 of the earths arable land. Intensive farming is cultivation to maximize productivity, with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs water, fertilizer, pesticide and automation. It is practiced mainly in developed countries. From the twentieth century onwards, intensive agriculture increased crop productivity. It substituted synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, but caused increased water pollution, and often involved farm subsidies. Soil degradation and diseases such as stem rust are major concerns globally approximately 40 of the worlds agricultural land is seriously degraded. In recent years there has been a backlash against the environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic, regenerative, and sustainable agriculture movements. One of the major forces behind this movement has been the European Union, which first certified organic food in 1991 and began reform of its Common Agricultural Policy CAP in 2005 to phase out commodity-linked farm subsidies, also known as decoupling. The growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management, selective breeding, and controlled-environment agriculture. There are concerns about the lower yield associated with organic farming and its impact on global food security. Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food. By 2015, the agricultural output of China was the largest in the world, followed by the European Union, India and the United States. Economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture, according to which agriculture in the United States is roughly 1.7 times more productive than it was in 1948. Agriculture employed 873 million people in 2021, or 27 of the global workforce, compared with 1 027 million or 40 in 2000. The share of agriculture in global GDP was stable at around 4 since 20002023. Despite increases in agricultural production and productivity, between 702 and 828 million people were affected by hunger in 2021. Food insecurity and malnutrition can be the result of conflict, climate extremes and variability and economic swings. It can also be caused by a countrys structural characteristics such as income status and natural resource endowments as well as its political economy. Pesticide use in agriculture went up 62 between 2000 and 2021, with the Americas accounting for half the use in 2021. The International Fund for Agricultural Development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and overall food security, given the favorable experience of Vietnam. Agriculture provides about one-quarter of all global employment, more than half in sub-Saharan Africa and almost 60 percent in low-income countries. As countries develop, other jobs have historically pulled workers away from agriculture, and labor-saving innovations increase agricultural productivity by reducing labor requirements per unit of output. Over time, a combination of labor supply and labor demand trends have driven down the share of population employed in agriculture. During the 16th century in Europe, between 55 and 75 of the population was engaged in agriculture by the 19th century, this had dropped to between 35 and 65. In the same countries today, the figure is less than 10. At the start of the 21st century, some one billion people, or over 13 of the available work force, were employed in agriculture. This constitutes approximately 70 of the global employment of children, and in many countries constitutes the largest percentage of women of any industry. The service sector overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2007. In many developed countries, immigrants help fill labor shortages in high-value agriculture activities that are difficult to mechanize. Foreign farm workers from mostly Eastern Europe, North Africa and South Asia constituted around one-third of the salaried agricultural workforce in Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal in 2013. In the United States of America, more than half of all hired farmworkers roughly 450,000 workers were immigrants in 2019, although the number of new immigrants arriving in the country to work in agriculture has fallen by 75 percent in recent years and rising wages indicate this has led to a major labor shortage on U.S. farms. Around the world, women make up a large share of the population employed in agriculture. This share is growing in all developing regions except East and Southeast Asia where women already make up about 50 percent of the agricultural workforce. Women make up 47 percent of the agricultural workforce in sub-Saharan Africa, a rate that has not changed significantly in the past few decades. However, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FAO posits that the roles and responsibilities of women in agriculture may be changing  for example, from subsistence farming to wage employment, and from contributing household members to primary producers in the context of male-out-migration. In general, women account for a greater share of agricultural employment at lower levels of economic development, as inadequate education, limited access to basic infrastructure and markets, high unpaid work burden and poor rural employment opportunities outside agriculture severely limit womens opportunities for off-farm work. Women who work in agricultural production tend to do so under highly unfavorable conditions. They tend to be concentrated in the poorest countries, where alternative livelihoods are not available, and they maintain the intensity of their work in conditions of climate-induced weather shocks and in situations of conflict. Women are less likely to participate as entrepreneurs and independent farmers and are engaged in the production of less lucrative crops. The gender gap in land productivity between female- and male managed farms of the same size is 24 percent. On average, women earn 18.4 percent less than men in wage employment in agriculture this means that women receive 82 cents for every dollar earned by men. Progress has been slow in closing gaps in womens access to irrigation and in ownership of livestock, too. Women in agriculture still have significantly less access than men to inputs, including improved seeds, fertilizers and mechanized equipment. On a positive note, the gender gap in access to mobile internet in low- and middle-income countries fell from 25 percent to 16 percent between 2017 and 2021, and the gender gap in access to bank accounts narrowed from 9 to 6 percentage points. Women are as likely as men to adopt new technologies when the necessary enabling factors are put in place and they have equal access to complementary resources. Agriculture, specifically farming, remains a hazardous industry, and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries, lung disease, noise-induced hearing loss, skin diseases, as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure. On industrialized farms, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers. Pesticides and other chemicals used in farming can be hazardous to worker health, and workers exposed to pesticides may experience illness or have children with birth defects. As an industry in which families commonly share in work and live on the farm itself, entire families can be at risk for injuries, illness, and death. Ages 06 may be an especially vulnerable population in agriculture common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning, machinery and motor accidents, including with all-terrain vehicles. The International Labor Organization considers agriculture one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors. It estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs. In addition, incidences of death, injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported. The organization has developed the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001, which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation, the prevention of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture should play. In the United States, agriculture has been identified by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health as a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda to identify and provide intervention strategies for occupational health and safety issues. In the European Union, the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work has issued guidelines on implementing health and safety directives in agriculture, livestock farming, horticulture, and forestry. The Agricultural Safety and Health Council of America ASHCA also holds a yearly summit to discuss safety. Overall production varies by country as listed. The twenty largest countries by agricultural output in nominal terms at peak level as of 2018, according to the IMF and CIA World Factbook. Cropping systems vary among farms depending on the available resources and constraints geography and climate of the farm government policy economic, social and political pressures and the philosophy and culture of the farmer. Shifting cultivation or slash and burn is a system in which forests are burnt, releasing nutrients to support cultivation of annual and then perennial crops for a period of several years. Then the plot is left fallow to regrow forest, and the farmer moves to a new plot, returning after many more years 1020. This fallow period is shortened if population density grows, requiring the input of nutrients fertilizer or manure and some manual pest control. Annual cultivation is the next phase of intensity in which there is no fallow period. This requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs. Further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage. Because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers. Multiple cropping, in which several crops are grown sequentially in one year, and intercropping, when several crops are grown at the same time, are other kinds of annual cropping systems known as polycultures. In subtropical and arid environments, the timing and extent of agriculture may be limited by rainfall, either not allowing multiple annual crops in a year, or requiring irrigation. In all of these environments perennial crops are grown coffee, chocolate and systems are practiced such as agroforestry. In temperate environments, where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system. Important categories of food crops include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits and vegetables. Natural fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax. Specific crops are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world. Production is listed in millions of metric tons, based on FAO estimates. Animal husbandry is the breeding and raising of animals for meat, milk, eggs, or wool, and for work and transport. Working animals, including horses, mules, oxen, water buffalo, camels, llamas, alpacas, donkeys, and dogs, have for centuries been used to help cultivate fields, harvest crops, wrangle other animals, and transport farm products to buyers. Livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless. As of 2010, 30 of Earths ice- and water-free area was used for producing livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.3 billion people. Between the 1960s and the 2000s, there was a significant increase in livestock production, both by numbers and by carcass weight, especially among beef, pigs and chickens, the latter of which had production increased by almost a factor of 10. Non-meat animals, such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens, also showed significant production increases. Global cattle, sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2050. Aquaculture or fish farming, the production of fish for human consumption in confined operations, is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production, growing at an average of 9 a year between 1975 and 2007. During the second half of the 20th century, producers using selective breeding focused on creating livestock breeds and crossbreeds that increased production, while mostly disregarding the need to preserve genetic diversity. This trend has led to a significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds, leading to a corresponding decrease in disease resistance and local adaptations previously found among traditional breeds. Grassland based livestock production relies upon plant material such as shrubland, rangeland, and pastures for feeding ruminant animals. Outside nutrient inputs may be used, however manure is returned directly to the grassland as a major nutrient source. This system is particularly important in areas where crop production is not feasible because of climate or soil, representing 3040 million pastoralists. Mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric one stomach mainly chickens and pigs livestock. Manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a fertilizer for crops. Landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm, representing the de-linking of crop and livestock production found more prevalently in Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member countries. Synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure use becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution. Industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of poultry and pork. Scientists estimate that 75 of the growth in livestock production between 2003 and 2030 will be in confined animal feeding operations, sometimes called factory farming. Much of this growth is happening in developing countries in Asia, with much smaller amounts of growth in Africa. Some of the practices used in commercial livestock production, including the usage of growth hormones, are controversial. Tillage is the practice of breaking up the soil with tools such as the plow or harrow to prepare for planting, for nutrient incorporation, or for pest control. Tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till. It can improve productivity by warming the soil, incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds, but also renders soil more prone to erosion, triggers the decomposition of organic matter releasing CO2, and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms. Pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, mites, and diseases. Chemical pesticides, biological biocontrol, mechanical tillage, and cultural practices are used. Cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and resistance. Integrated pest management attempts to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss, and recommends pesticides as a last resort. Nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production, and the method of use of manure produced by livestock. Nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, green manure, compost and minerals. Crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period. Manure is used either by holding livestock where the feed crop is growing, such as in managed intensive rotational grazing, or by spreading either dry or liquid formulations of manure on cropland or pastures. Water management is needed where rainfall is insufficient or variable, which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world. Some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall. In other areas such as the Great Plains in the U.S. and Canada, farmers use a fallow year to conserve soil moisture for the following year. Recent technological innovations in precision agriculture allow for water status monitoring and automate water usage, leading to more efficient management. Agriculture represents 70 of freshwater use worldwide. However, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture vary significantly by income level. In least developed countries and landlocked developing countries, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture are as high as 90 percent of total water withdrawals and about 60 percent in Small Island Developing States. According to 2014 report by the International Food Policy Research Institute, agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other. Using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, food security and trade by 2050, the International Food Policy Research Institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40 and food prices could be reduced by almost half. Payment for ecosystem services is a method of providing additional incentives to encourage farmers to conserve some aspects of the environment. Measures might include paying for reforestation upstream of a city, to improve the supply of fresh water. Different definitions exist for agricultural automation and for the variety of tools and technologies that are used to automate production. One view is that agricultural automation refers to autonomous navigation by robots without human intervention. Alternatively, it is defined as the accomplishment of production tasks through mobile, autonomous, decision-making, mechatronic devices. However, FAO finds that these definitions do not capture all the aspects and forms of automation, such as robotic milking machines that are static, most motorized machinery that automates the performing of agricultural operations, and digital tools e.g., sensors that automate only diagnosis. FAO defines agricultural automation as the use of machinery and equipment in agricultural operations to improve their diagnosis, decision-making or performing, reducing the drudgery of agricultural work or improving the timeliness, and potentially the precision, of agricultural operations. The technological evolution in agriculture has involved a progressive move from manual tools to animal traction, to motorized mechanization, to digital equipment and finally, to robotics with artificial intelligence AI. Motorized mechanization using engine power automates the performance of agricultural operations such as ploughing and milking. With digital automation technologies, it also becomes possible to automate diagnosis and decision-making of agricultural operations. For example, autonomous crop robots can harvest and seed crops, while drones can gather information to help automate input application. Precision agriculture often employs such automation technologies. Motorized machines are increasingly complemented, or even superseded, by new digital equipment that automates diagnosis and decision-making. A conventional tractor, for example, can be converted into an automated vehicle allowing it to sow a field autonomously. Motorized mechanization has increased significantly across the world in recent years, although reliable global data with broad country coverage exist only for tractors and only up to 2009. Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region where the adoption of motorized mechanization has stalled over the past decades. Automation technologies are increasingly used for managing livestock, though evidence on adoption is lacking. Global automatic milking system sales have increased over recent years, but adoption is likely mostly in Northern Europe, and likely almost absent in low- and middle-income countries. Automated feeding machines for both cows and poultry also exist, but data and evidence regarding their adoption trends and drivers is likewise scarce. Measuring the overall employment impacts of agricultural automation is difficult because it requires large amounts of data tracking all the transformations and the associated reallocation of workers both upstream and downstream. While automation technologies reduce labor needs for the newly automated tasks, they also generate new labor demand for other tasks, such as equipment maintenance and operation. Agricultural automation can also stimulate employment by allowing producers to expand production and by creating other agrifood systems jobs. This is especially true when it happens in context of rising scarcity of rural labor, as is the case in high-income countries and many middle-income countries. On the other hand, if forcedly promoted, for example through government subsidies in contexts of abundant rural labor, it can lead to labor displacement and falling or stagnant wages, particularly affecting poor and low-skilled workers. Climate change and agriculture are interrelated on a global scale. Climate change affects agriculture through changes in average temperatures, rainfall, and weather extremes like storms and heat waves changes in pests and diseases changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and ground-level ozone concentrations changes in the nutritional quality of some foods and changes in sea level. Global warming is already affecting agriculture, with effects unevenly distributed across the world. In a 2022 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change describes how human-induced warming has slowed growth of agricultural productivity over the past 50 years in mid and low latitudes. Methane emissions have negatively impacted crop yields by increasing temperatures and surface ozone concentrations. Warming is also negatively affecting crop and grassland quality and harvest stability. Ocean warming has decreased sustainable yields of some wild fish populations while ocean acidification and warming have already affected farmed aquatic species. Climate change will probably increase the risk of food insecurity for some vulnerable groups, such as the poor. Crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years, since the beginning of civilization. Altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans, for example, larger fruits or seeds, drought-tolerance, or resistance to pests. Significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist Gregor Mendel. His work on dominant and recessive alleles, although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques. Crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits, self-pollination and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism. Domestication of plants has, over the centuries increased yield, improved disease resistance and drought tolerance, eased harvest and improved the taste and nutritional value of crop plants. Careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. Plant selection and breeding in the 1920s and 1930s improved pasture grasses and clover in New Zealand. Extensive X-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts i.e. primitive genetic engineering during the 1950s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat, corn maize and barley. The Green Revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to sharply increase yield by creating high-yielding varieties. For example, average yields of corn maize in the US have increased from around 2.5 tons per hectare tha 40 bushels per acre in 1900 to about 9.4 tha 150 bushels per acre in 2001. Similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 tha in 1900 to more than 2.5 tha in 1990. South American average wheat yields are around 2 tha, African under 1 tha, and Egypt and Arabia up to 3.5 to 4 tha with irrigation. In contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as France is over 8 tha. Variations in yields are due mainly to variation in climate, genetics, and the level of intensive farming techniques use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, and growth control to avoid lodging. Investments into innovation for agriculture are long term. This is because it takes time for research to become commercialized and for technology to be adapted to meet multiple regions needs, as well as meet national guidelines before being adopted and planted in a farmers fields. For instance, it took at least 60 years from the introduction of hybrid corn technology before its adoption became widespread. Agricultural innovation developed for the specific agroecological conditions of one region is not easily transferred and used in another region with different agroecological conditions. Instead, the innovation would have to be adapted to the specific conditions of that other region and respect its biodiversity and environmental requirements and guidelines. Some such adaptations can be seen through the steadily increasing number of plant varieties protected under the plant variety protection instrument administered by the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants UPOV. Genetically modified organisms GMO are organisms whose genetic material has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant DNA technology. Genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to use in creating desired germlines for new crops. Increased durability, nutritional content, insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering. For some, GMO crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns. Numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production, import or use of GMO foods and crops. The Biosafety Protocol, an international treaty, regulates the trade of GMOs. There is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from GMOs, and while the EU currently requires all GMO foods to be labeled, the US does not. Herbicide-resistant seeds have a gene implanted into their genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosate. These seeds allow the farmer to grow a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop. Herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide. With the increasing use of herbicide-tolerant crops, comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays. In some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed, causing farmers to switch to other herbicides. Some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to iron deficiencies in some crops, which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern, with potential economic and health implications. Other GMO crops used by growers include insect-resistant crops, which have a gene from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis Bt, which produces a toxin specific to insects. These crops resist damage by insects. Some believe that similar or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through traditional breeding practices, and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild species. In some cases, wild species are the primary source of resistance traits some tomato cultivars that have gained resistance to at least 19 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes.  Agriculture is both a cause of and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation and climate change, which cause decreases in crop yield. Agriculture is one of the most important drivers of environmental pressures, particularly habitat change, climate change, water use and toxic emissions. Agriculture is the main source of toxins released into the environment, including insecticides, especially those used on cotton. The 2011 UNEP Green Economy report stated that agricultural operations produced some 13 percent of anthropogenic global greenhouse gas emissions. This includes gases from the use of inorganic fertilizers, agro-chemical pesticides, and herbicides, as well as fossil fuel-energy inputs. Agriculture imposes multiple external costs upon society through effects such as pesticide damage to nature especially herbicides and insecticides, nutrient runoff, excessive water usage, and loss of natural environment. A 2000 assessment of agriculture in the UK determined total external costs for 1996 of 2,343 million, or 208 per hectare. A 2005 analysis of these costs in the US concluded that cropland imposes approximately 5 to 16 billion 30 to 96 per hectare, while livestock production imposes 714 million. Both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs. Neither included subsidies in their analysis, but they noted that subsidies also influence the cost of agriculture to society. Agriculture seeks to increase yield and to reduce costs, often employing measures that cut biodiversity to very low levels. Yield increases with inputs such as fertilizers and removal of pathogens, predators, and competitors such as weeds. Costs decrease with increasing scale of farm units, such as making fields larger this means removing hedges, ditches and other areas of habitat. Pesticides kill insects, plants and fungi. Effective yields fall with on-farm losses, which may be caused by poor production practices during harvesting, handling, and storage. The environmental effects of climate change show that research on pests and diseases that do not generally afflict areas is essential. In 2021, farmers discovered stem rust on wheat in the Champagne area of France, a disease that had previously only occurred in Morocco for 20 to 30 years. Because of climate change, insects that used to die off over the winter are now alive and multiplying. A senior UN official, Henning Steinfeld, said that Livestock are one of the most significant contributors to todays most serious environmental problems. Livestock production occupies 70 of all land used for agriculture, or 30 of the land surface of the planet. It is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18 of the worlds greenhouse gas emissions as measured in CO2 equivalents. By comparison, all transportation emits 13.5 of the CO2. It produces 65 of human-related nitrous oxide which has 296 times the global warming potential of CO2 and 37 of all human-induced methane which is 23 times as warming as CO2. It also generates 64 of the ammonia emission. Livestock expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation in the Amazon basin 70 of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feed crops. Through deforestation and land degradation, livestock is also driving reductions in biodiversity. A well documented phenomenon is woody plant encroachment, caused by overgrazing in rangelands. Furthermore, the United Nations Environment Programme UNEP states that methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 per cent by 2030 under current practices and consumption patterns. Land transformation, the use of land to yield goods and services, is the most substantial way humans alter the Earths ecosystems, and is the driving force causing biodiversity loss. Estimates of the amount of land transformed by humans vary from 39 to 50. It is estimated that 24 of land globally experiences land degradation, a long-term decline in ecosystem function and productivity, with cropland being disproportionately affected. Land management is the driving factor behind degradation 1.5 billion people rely upon the degrading land. Degradation can be through deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral depletion, acidification, or salinization. In 2021, the global agricultural land area was 4.79 billion hectares ha, down 2 percent, or 0.09 billion ha compared with 2000. Between 2000 and 2021, roughly two-thirds of agricultural land were used for permanent meadows and pastures 3.21 billion ha in 2021, which declined by 5 percent 0.17 billion ha. One-third of the total agricultural land was cropland 1.58 billion ha in 2021, which increased by 6 percent 0.09 billion ha. Eutrophication, excessive nutrient enrichment in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal blooms and anoxia, leads to fish kills, loss of biodiversity, and renders water unfit for drinking and other industrial uses. Excessive fertilization and manure application to cropland, as well as high livestock stocking densities cause nutrient mainly nitrogen and phosphorus runoff and leaching from agricultural land. These nutrients are major nonpoint pollutants contributing to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems and pollution of groundwater, with harmful effects on human populations. Fertilizers also reduce terrestrial biodiversity by increasing competition for light, favoring those species that are able to benefit from the added nutrients. Agriculture simultaneously is facing growing freshwater demand and precipitation anomalies droughts, floods, and extreme rainfall and weather events on rainfed areas fields and grazing lands. Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of withdrawals of freshwater resources, and an estimated 41 percent of current global irrigation water use occurs at the expense of environmental flow requirements. It is long known that aquifers in areas as diverse as northern China, the Upper Ganges and the western US are being depleted, and new research extends these problems to aquifers in Iran, Mexico and Saudi Arabia. Increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas, meaning that water scarcity is increasing and agriculture is facing the challenge of producing more food for the worlds growing population with reduced water resources. While industrial withdrawals have declined in the past few decades and municipal withdrawals have increased only marginally since 2010, agricultural withdrawals have continued to grow at an ever faster pace. Agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems, including the destruction of natural wetlands, the spread of water-borne diseases, and land degradation through salinization and waterlogging, when irrigation is performed incorrectly. Pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.5 million short tons annually worldwide, yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant. The World Health Organization estimated in 1992 that three million pesticide poisonings occur annually, causing 220,000 deaths. Pesticides select for pesticide resistance in the pest population, leading to a condition termed the pesticide treadmill in which pest resistance warrants the development of a new pesticide. An alternative argument is that the way to save the environment and prevent famine is by using pesticides and intensive high yield farming, a view exemplified by a quote heading the Center for Global Food Issues website Growing more per acre leaves more land for nature. However, critics argue that a trade-off between the environment and a need for food is not inevitable, and that pesticides can replace good agronomic practices such as crop rotation. The Pushpull agricultural pest management technique involves intercropping, using plant aromas to repel pests from crops push and to lure them to a place from which they can then be removed pull. Agriculture contributes towards climate change through greenhouse gas emissions and by the conversion of non-agricultural land such as forests into agricultural land. The agriculture, forestry and land use sector contribute between 13 and 21 of global greenhouse gas emissions. Emissions of nitrous oxide, methane make up over half of total greenhouse gas emission from agriculture. Animal husbandry is a major source of greenhouse gas emissions. Approximately 57 of global GHG emissions from the production of food are from the production of animal-based food while plant-based foods contribute 29 and the remaining 14 is for other utilizations. Farmland management and land-use change represented major shares of total emissions 38 and 29, respectively, whereas rice and beef were the largest contributing plant- and animal-based commodities 12 and 25, respectively. South and Southeast Asia and South America were the largest emitters of production-based GHGs. Current farming methods have resulted in over-stretched water resources, high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility. There is not enough water to continue farming using current practices therefore how water, land, and ecosystem resources are used to boost crop yields must be reconsidered. A solution would be to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests. Inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed, such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich, the clearing of land to make way for more productive farmland, or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights. Technological advancements help provide farmers with tools and resources to make farming more sustainable. Technology permits innovations like conservation tillage, a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion, reduces water pollution, and enhances carbon sequestration. Agricultural automation can help address some of the challenges associated with climate change and thus facilitate adaptation efforts. For example, the application of digital automation technologies e.g. in precision agriculture can improve resource-use efficiency in conditions which are increasingly constrained for agricultural producers. Moreover, when applied to sensing and early warning, they can help address the uncertainty and unpredictability of weather conditions associated with accelerating climate change. Other potential sustainable practices include conservation agriculture, agroforestry, improved grazing, avoided grassland conversion, and biochar. Current mono-crop farming practices in the United States preclude widespread adoption of sustainable practices, such as 23 crop rotations that incorporate grass or hay with annual crops, unless negative emission goals such as soil carbon sequestration become policy. The food demand of Earths projected population, with current climate change predictions, could be satisfied by improvement of agricultural methods, expansion of agricultural areas, and a sustainability-oriented consumer mindset. Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides. The vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources. Between the 1960s and the 1980s, the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the globe, with world grain production increasing significantly between 70 and 390 for wheat and 60 to 150 for rice, depending on geographic area as world population doubled. Heavy reliance on petrochemicals has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output. Industrialized agriculture depends on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways direct consumption on the farm and manufacture of inputs used on the farm. Direct consumption includes the use of lubricants and fuels to operate farm vehicles and machinery. Indirect consumption includes the manufacture of fertilizers, pesticides, and farm machinery. In particular, the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of agricultural energy usage. Together, direct and indirect consumption by US farms accounts for about 2 of the nations energy use. Direct and indirect energy consumption by U.S. farms peaked in 1979, and has since gradually declined. Food systems encompass not just agriculture but off-farm processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consumption, and disposal of food and food-related items. Agriculture accounts for less than one-fifth of food system energy use in the US. Plastic products are used extensively in agriculture, including to increase crop yields and improve the efficiency of water and agrichemical use. Agriplastic products include films to cover greenhouses and tunnels, mulch to cover soil e.g. to suppress weeds, conserve water, increase soil temperature and aid fertilizer application, shade cloth, pesticide containers, seedling trays, protective mesh and irrigation tubing. The polymers most commonly used in these products are low- density polyethylene LPDE, linear low-density polyethylene LLDPE, polypropylene PP and polyvinyl chloride PVC. The total amount of plastics used in agriculture is difficult to quantify. A 2012 study reported that almost 6.5 million tonnes per year were consumed globally while a later study estimated that global demand in 2015 was between 7.3 million and 9 million tonnes. Widespread use of plastic mulch and lack of systematic collection and management have led to the generation of large amounts of mulch residue. Weathering and degradation eventually cause the mulch to fragment. These fragments and larger pieces of plastic accumulate in soil. Mulch residue has been measured at levels of 50 to 260 kg per hectare in topsoil in areas where mulch use dates back more than 10 years, which confirms that mulching is a major source of both microplastic and macroplastic soil contamination. Agricultural plastics, especially plastic films, are not easy to recycle because of high contamination levels up to 4050 by weight contamination by pesticides, fertilizers, soil and debris, moist vegetation, silage juice water, and UV stabilizers and collection difficulties . Therefore, they are often buried or abandoned in fields and watercourses or burned. These disposal practices lead to soil degradation and can result in contamination of soils and leakage of microplastics into the marine environment as a result of precipitation run-off and tidal washing. In addition, additives in residual plastic film such as UV and thermal stabilizers may have deleterious effects on crop growth, soil structure, nutrient transport and salt levels. There is a risk that plastic mulch will deteriorate soil quality, deplete soil organic matter stocks, increase soil water repellence and emit greenhouse gases. Microplastics released through fragmentation of agricultural plastics can absorb and concentrate contaminants capable of being passed up the trophic chain. Agricultural economics is economics as it relates to the production, distribution and consumption of  goods and services. Combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1800s, and grew significantly through the 20th century. Although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent, major trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history, ranging from tenant farmers and sharecropping in the post-American Civil War Southern United States to the European feudal system of manorialism. In the United States, and elsewhere, food costs attributed to food processing, distribution, and agricultural marketing, sometimes referred to as the value chain, have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined. This is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition e.g. more highly processed products provided by the supply chain. Market concentration has increased in the sector as well, and although the total effect of the increased market concentration is likely increased efficiency, the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers farmers and consumers, and may have negative implications for rural communities. National government policies, such as taxation, subsidies, tariffs and others, can significantly change the economic marketplace for agricultural products. Since at least the 1960s, a combination of trade restrictions, exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the developing and the developed world. In the 1980s, non-subsidized farmers in developing countries experienced adverse effects from national policies that created artificially low global prices for farm products. Between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, several international agreements limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions. However, as of 2009, there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices. The three agricultural products with the most trade distortion were sugar, milk and rice, mainly due to taxation. Among the oilseeds, sesame had the most taxation, but overall, feed grains and oilseeds had much lower levels of taxation than livestock products. Since the 1980s, policy-driven distortions have decreases more among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy. Despite this progress, certain crops, such as cotton, still see subsidies in developed countries artificially deflating global prices, causing hardship in developing countries with non-subsidized farmers. Unprocessed commodities such as corn, soybeans, and cattle are generally graded to indicate quality, affecting the price the producer receives. Commodities are generally reported by production quantities, such as volume, number or weight. Agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. It covers topics such as agronomy, plant breeding and genetics, plant pathology, crop modeling, soil science, entomology, production techniques and improvement, study of pests and their management, and study of adverse environmental effects such as soil degradation, waste management, and bioremediation. The scientific study of agriculture began in the 18th century, when Johann Friedrich Mayer conducted experiments on the use of gypsum hydrated calcium sulphate as a fertilizer. Research became more systematic when in 1843, John Lawes and Henry Gilbert began a set of long-term agronomy field experiments at Rothamsted Research Station in England some of them, such as the Park Grass Experiment, are still running. In America, the Hatch Act of 1887 provided funding for what it was the first to call agricultural science, driven by farmers interest in fertilizers. In agricultural entomology, the USDA began to research biological control in 1881 it instituted its first large program in 1905, searching Europe and Japan for natural enemies of the spongy moth and brown-tail moth, establishing parasitoids such as solitary wasps and predators of both pests in the US. Agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products. Governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets. Some overarching themes include risk management and adjustment including policies related to climate change, food safety and natural disasters, economic stability including policies related to taxes, natural resources and environmental sustainability especially water policy, research and development, and market access for domestic commodities including relations with global organizations and agreements with other countries. Agricultural policy can also touch on food quality, ensuring that the food supply is of a consistent and known quality, food security, ensuring that the food supply meets the populations needs, and conservation. Policy programs can range from financial programs, such as subsidies, to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs. A 2021 report finds that globally, support to agricultural producers accounts for almost US540 billion a year. This amounts to 15 percent of total agricultural production value, and is heavily biased towards measures that are leading to inefficiency, as well as are unequally distributed and harmful for the environment and human health. There are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy, including consumers, agribusiness, trade lobbies and other groups. Agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making, in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions. Political action groups, including those interested in environmental issues and labor unions, also provide influence, as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FAO leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global agricultural regulations and agreements. Samuel Jutzi, director of FAOs animal production and health division, states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that would improve human health and the environment. For example, proposals in 2010 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health, and environmental regulations, such as the number of animals an area of land can support without long-term damage, were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure. This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO license statementpermission. Text taken from Drowning in Plastics  Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics, United Nations Environment Programme. This article incorporates text from a free content work license statementpermission. Text taken from In Brief The State of Food and Agriculture 2019. Moving forward on food loss and waste reduction, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work license statementpermission. Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2022. Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work license statementpermission. Text taken from In Brief The State of Food and Agriculture 2018. Migration, agriculture and rural development, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work license statementpermission. Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food and Agriculture 2022. Leveraging automation in agriculture for transforming agrifood systems, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work license statementpermission. Text taken from Enabling inclusive agricultural automation, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 license statementpermission. Text taken from The status of women in agrifood systems  Overview, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 license statementpermission. Text taken from World Food and Agriculture  Statistical Yearbook 2023, FAO, FAO. This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 license statementpermission. Text taken from World Intellectual Property Report 2024 - The importance of local capabilities in AgTech specialization, WIPO, WIPO.
This glossary of agriculture is a list of definitions of terms and concepts used in agriculture, its sub-disciplines, and related fields, including horticulture, animal husbandry, agribusiness, and agricultural policy. For other glossaries relevant to agricultural science, see Glossary of biology, Glossary of ecology, Glossary of environmental science, and Glossary of botanical terms. pl. aboiteaux Also farmers co-op or simply a co-op. Also agriscience or ag science, and often pluralized as in agricultural sciences. Also agriculturalist, agricultural scientist, agrologist, or agronomist. Also veganic farming. Also beekeeping. Also aquafarming. Also selective breeding. Also sometimes barb wire. Also rendered board-foot and abbreviated as BDFT or BF. Also millers bran. Also U-fork or grelinette. Sometimes used interchangeably with fryer. Also incubating. Also billy goat. pl. calves Also profit crop. Also circle irrigation or water-wheel irrigation. Often used interchangeably with fertigation. Also chisel plow. Also communal farming. Also simply combine. Also contouring. Also corn house, ambar, or hórreo. Also single-suckler herd. Also aerial application or topdressing. Also cultigen. Also cultivated meat or lab-grown meat. Also deflowering. Also diatomite, celite, or kieselguhr. Also dibble or dibbler. Also smart farming and e-agriculture. Also cropping or tailing. Also doddy, dody, and duddie. Also nanny goat. Also dogey, dogy, and doggie. Also dovecot and columbarium. Also draught animal. Also trickle irrigation. Also drop pen. Also driving. Also dry farming or arid-zone agriculture. Also dewattling. Also intact. Also extensive farming. Also farm shop. Also feed yard. Also fertiliser. Also conservation buffer or buffer strip. Also fattening. Also flower farming. Also provender, animal feed, or simply feed. Also edible landscaping. Also farrowing crate or sow stall. Also cattle prod or simply prod. Also simply elevator. Also grain elevator or bucket elevator. Also pastoralist or runholder. Also called the Third Agricultural Revolution. Also glasshouse. Also plough pan. Also haystack or simply stack or cock. Also haymow. Also hayrick or simply rick. Also turnrow. Also mustering. Also ridging or earthing up. Also heterosis or outbreeding enhancement. Also technical crop. Also intensive farming. Also interculture. Also jennet. Also timber. Also linchet. Also malt barn or maltings. Also trough or feeder. Also muck spreader or honey wagon. Also mechanised agriculture. Also millrun, lade, leat, flume, or penstock. Also continuous cropping. Also fixing. Also oast house or hop kiln. Also organic agriculture, biological farming, and ecological farming. Also natural fertilizer. Plural oxen also bullock.  Also simply paddy. Also livestock farming or grazing. Also pellet press. Also simply wilting point WP. Also molecular farming, molecular pharming, and biopharming. Also hog. Also fish farming. Also plashing. Also plow. Also plow pan. Also plow planting. Also plowing. Also plowshare. Also poddy calf. Also polyhouse, hoophouse, grow tunnel, or high tunnel. Also fruticulture. Also satellite farming and site-specific crop management. Also pseudograin. Also simply quern. Also cattleman or stockgrower. Also simply range. Also rootcrop. Also rooting depth or rhizosphere. Also seedling bed. Also woolshed. Also abattoir. Also truck row. Also slurry tank, slurry lagoon, or slurry store. Also soil improvement or soil conditioner. Also microbial inoculant and bioinoculant. Often used interchangeably with seeding and planting. Also simply staple. Also cattle station, sheep station, or run. Also shock or stack. Also pigsty, pig pen, pig parlor, or pig-cote. Also subsurface irrigation or seepage irrigation. Also flat lifter. Also sun-dried. Also southwest injury. Also windrower. Also pig or hog. Also hay tedder. Also conditioning. Also thresher. Also topdressing. Also TTC assay or tetrazolium test. Also outplanting and replanting. Also treillage. Also winegrowing. Also two-wheel tractor or single-axle tractor. Also water mill. Also weaner. Also wheat mill run WMR, millfeed MF, and midds. Also shelterbelt. Also agricultural output.
Farming in Canada can be full of a lot of confusing terminology and lingo. Even those working in the industry can get confused if, for example, they work in a greenhouse but dont know anything about raising chickens. Heres a glossary of terms that are commonly used in agriculture                                                                                                                                                
About the blog  Writing  Speaking  Bibliography  Subscribe  Roots of Progress Institute by Jason Crawford  March 24, 2020  4 min read Every time I start learning about a new area, I encounter terms I dont know the definition of. Usually Im familiar with the words, but as I try to grasp what Im reading, I realize I dont actually know their meanings. Early examples were charcoal, steel, and smelting. Often there are two or three terms that I understand in a general way but dont know the difference between, such as cement vs. concrete. Concepts are the building bricks of knowledge, and without getting clear on them, you have no hope of learning any new subject. So I make the time to look things up and read multiple sources until I feel clear on definitions and distinctions. It slows me down in the beginning but speeds me up long term. Ive just started learning about agriculture, so Im in that stage now. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, here are some terms I looked up recently Plowing, tilling, and harrowing What are these things? I had a vague idea that they were all different ways of preparing the soil, and thats basically right. Tilling is the most general term it refers to any mechanical agitation of the soil. Plowing and harrowing are types of tilling. Plowing specifically refers to taking the top layer of the soil and turning it over, flipping it upside down. I think this is done to bury anything that was growing on the surface such as weeds, and to expose nutrients that are below the surface, and probably for other reasons Im not quite clear on yet. Harrowing seems to be more like cutting or scraping the soil, and is used for multiple purposes including, I believe, preparing the seedbed. To make things more confusing, there is a tool called a tiller that does a specific type of tilling, which is also basically combing or raking the soil, and sometimes tilling seems to be used in this narrower sense. So far the only difference I can see between a tiller and a harrow is that the harrow is wider, agitating many rows at once. Wikipedia has a general article on tillage, and a site that reviews agricultural machinery has helpful explanations of tilling vs. plowing and tilling vs. harrowing. As a side note, I love how some of the most helpful online resources come from these niche industry content marketing sites. Spring vs. winter crops A quote from A History of Agriculture in Europe and America In the three-field system, as noted above, one field was fallow, the second planted with winter grain wheat or rye, and the third with a spring crop barley, oats, beans, peas, vetches. Why are some crops winter and others spring? Does this have to do with the biology of the plants? Is it a convention for some social or economic reason? Turns out it is mostly biology. Every plant has an optimal temperature range to grow in, a range in which it might grow but might taste bad, and a range in which it wont grow or will die. Penn State and The Scientist Gardener were helpful resources here. To make things more confusing, winter crops are planted in the fall, and can actually be planted again in early spring, a bit before the last frost spring crops must be planted in late spring and grow through the summer. Actually, its even more confusing than that, because this is all relative to local climatein a hot, dry area like California, spring crops can be planted in fall. The Penn State page helpfully uses the less-confusing terms cool-weather vs. warm-weather plants. Arable land, pasture, and meadow Sure, you know the word meadow and you can probably picture one, but can you define it? Can you distinguish it from a pasture, or a big field with, like, grass and flowers and stuff? I couldnt. Arable land is basically farmland. Broadly, it can refer to any land capable of growing crops in a narrower definition, especially for the purpose of agricultural statistics, it is land currently being used for crops even if temporarily fallow. Here we are talking about the kind of crops that have to be replanted each year arable land is distinguished from permanent cropland such as orchards or vineyards. Pasture and meadow are both fields where grass and similar plants are grown to feed livestock. The difference? You let the livestock graze in the pasture, but not in the meadowyou save the grass in the meadow to make hay, presumably to feed the livestock in the winter. Hay, you might be wondering at this point, hay what is that? And how is it different from straw? Straw is the dried stalks of cereal crops it has uses as rough bedding, or for weaving into products such as hats or baskets, or for thatching roofs. Hay is food. Specifically, it is food for livestock, typically made from grass or alfalfa. Wikipedia has a good summary of the different types of agricultural land. Intensive vs. extensive agriculture This term also came up in the book I was reading, and I was wondering, is it self-explanatory? After reading Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica, it seems self-explanatory. Extensive agriculture just means youre not very efficient and so you use a lot of land to produce a given amount. Intensive agriculture means you get more efficient and use less land per unit output. Modern industrial agriculture is of course the most intense. Unclear to me if theres any kind of qualitative difference here or if its just a matter of degree. Comment on Reddit Every time I start learning about a new area, I encounter terms I dont know the definition of. Usually Im familiar with the words, but as I try to grasp what Im reading, I realize I dont actually know their meanings. Early examples were charcoal, steel, and smelting. Often there are two or three terms that I understand in a general way but dont know the difference between, such as cement vs. concrete. Concepts are the building bricks of knowledge, and without getting clear on them, you have no hope of learning any new subject. So I make the time to look things up and read multiple sources until I feel clear on definitions and distinctions. It slows me down in the beginning but speeds me up long term. Ive just started learning about agriculture, so Im in that stage now. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, here are some terms I looked up recently Plowing, tilling, and harrowing What are these things? I had a vague idea that they were all different ways of preparing the soil, and thats basically right. Tilling is the most general term it refers to any mechanical agitation of the soil. Plowing and harrowing are types of tilling. Plowing specifically refers to taking the top layer of the soil and turning it over, flipping it upside down. I think this is done to bury anything that was growing on the surface such as weeds, and to expose nutrients that are below the surface, and probably for other reasons Im not quite clear on yet. Harrowing seems to be more like cutting or scraping the soil, and is used for multiple purposes including, I believe, preparing the seedbed. To make things more confusing, there is a tool called a tiller that does a specific type of tilling, which is also basically combing or raking the soil, and sometimes tilling seems to be used in this narrower sense. So far the only difference I can see between a tiller and a harrow is that the harrow is wider, agitating many rows at once. Wikipedia has a general article on tillage, and a site that reviews agricultural machinery has helpful explanations of tilling vs. plowing and tilling vs. harrowing. As a side note, I love how some of the most helpful online resources come from these niche industry content marketing sites. Spring vs. winter crops A quote from A History of Agriculture in Europe and America In the three-field system, as noted above, one field was fallow, the second planted with winter grain wheat or rye, and the third with a spring crop barley, oats, beans, peas, vetches. Why are some crops winter and others spring? Does this have to do with the biology of the plants? Is it a convention for some social or economic reason? Turns out it is mostly biology. Every plant has an optimal temperature range to grow in, a range in which it might grow but might taste bad, and a range in which it wont grow or will die. Penn State and The Scientist Gardener were helpful resources here. To make things more confusing, winter crops are planted in the fall, and can actually be planted again in early spring, a bit before the last frost spring crops must be planted in late spring and grow through the summer. Actually, its even more confusing than that, because this is all relative to local climatein a hot, dry area like California, spring crops can be planted in fall. The Penn State page helpfully uses the less-confusing terms cool-weather vs. warm-weather plants. Arable land, pasture, and meadow Sure, you know the word meadow and you can probably picture one, but can you define it? Can you distinguish it from a pasture, or a big field with, like, grass and flowers and stuff? I couldnt. Arable land is basically farmland. Broadly, it can refer to any land capable of growing crops in a narrower definition, especially for the purpose of agricultural statistics, it is land currently being used for crops even if temporarily fallow. Here we are talking about the kind of crops that have to be replanted each year arable land is distinguished from permanent cropland such as orchards or vineyards. Pasture and meadow are both fields where grass and similar plants are grown to feed livestock. The difference? You let the livestock graze in the pasture, but not in the meadowyou save the grass in the meadow to make hay, presumably to feed the livestock in the winter. Hay, you might be wondering at this point, hay what is that? And how is it different from straw? Straw is the dried stalks of cereal crops it has uses as rough bedding, or for weaving into products such as hats or baskets, or for thatching roofs. Hay is food. Specifically, it is food for livestock, typically made from grass or alfalfa. Wikipedia has a good summary of the different types of agricultural land. Intensive vs. extensive agriculture This term also came up in the book I was reading, and I was wondering, is it self-explanatory? After reading Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica, it seems self-explanatory. Extensive agriculture just means youre not very efficient and so you use a lot of land to produce a given amount. Intensive agriculture means you get more efficient and use less land per unit output. Modern industrial agriculture is of course the most intense. Unclear to me if theres any kind of qualitative difference here or if its just a matter of degree. Comment on Reddit Every time I start learning about a new area, I encounter terms I dont know the definition of. Usually Im familiar with the words, but as I try to grasp what Im reading, I realize I dont actually know their meanings. Early examples were charcoal, steel, and smelting. Often there are two or three terms that I understand in a general way but dont know the difference between, such as cement vs. concrete. Concepts are the building bricks of knowledge, and without getting clear on them, you have no hope of learning any new subject. So I make the time to look things up and read multiple sources until I feel clear on definitions and distinctions. It slows me down in the beginning but speeds me up long term. Ive just started learning about agriculture, so Im in that stage now. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, here are some terms I looked up recently What are these things? I had a vague idea that they were all different ways of preparing the soil, and thats basically right. Tilling is the most general term it refers to any mechanical agitation of the soil. Plowing and harrowing are types of tilling. Plowing specifically refers to taking the top layer of the soil and turning it over, flipping it upside down. I think this is done to bury anything that was growing on the surface such as weeds, and to expose nutrients that are below the surface, and probably for other reasons Im not quite clear on yet. Harrowing seems to be more like cutting or scraping the soil, and is used for multiple purposes including, I believe, preparing the seedbed. To make things more confusing, there is a tool called a tiller that does a specific type of tilling, which is also basically combing or raking the soil, and sometimes tilling seems to be used in this narrower sense. So far the only difference I can see between a tiller and a harrow is that the harrow is wider, agitating many rows at once. Wikipedia has a general article on tillage, and a site that reviews agricultural machinery has helpful explanations of tilling vs. plowing and tilling vs. harrowing. As a side note, I love how some of the most helpful online resources come from these niche industry content marketing sites. A quote from A History of Agriculture in Europe and America In the three-field system, as noted above, one field was fallow, the second planted with winter grain wheat or rye, and the third with a spring crop barley, oats, beans, peas, vetches. Why are some crops winter and others spring? Does this have to do with the biology of the plants? Is it a convention for some social or economic reason? Turns out it is mostly biology. Every plant has an optimal temperature range to grow in, a range in which it might grow but might taste bad, and a range in which it wont grow or will die. Penn State and The Scientist Gardener were helpful resources here. To make things more confusing, winter crops are planted in the fall, and can actually be planted again in early spring, a bit before the last frost spring crops must be planted in late spring and grow through the summer. Actually, its even more confusing than that, because this is all relative to local climatein a hot, dry area like California, spring crops can be planted in fall. The Penn State page helpfully uses the less-confusing terms cool-weather vs. warm-weather plants. Sure, you know the word meadow and you can probably picture one, but can you define it? Can you distinguish it from a pasture, or a big field with, like, grass and flowers and stuff? I couldnt. Arable land is basically farmland. Broadly, it can refer to any land capable of growing crops in a narrower definition, especially for the purpose of agricultural statistics, it is land currently being used for crops even if temporarily fallow. Here we are talking about the kind of crops that have to be replanted each year arable land is distinguished from permanent cropland such as orchards or vineyards. Pasture and meadow are both fields where grass and similar plants are grown to feed livestock. The difference? You let the livestock graze in the pasture, but not in the meadowyou save the grass in the meadow to make hay, presumably to feed the livestock in the winter. Hay, you might be wondering at this point, hay what is that? And how is it different from straw? Straw is the dried stalks of cereal crops it has uses as rough bedding, or for weaving into products such as hats or baskets, or for thatching roofs. Hay is food. Specifically, it is food for livestock, typically made from grass or alfalfa. Wikipedia has a good summary of the different types of agricultural land. This term also came up in the book I was reading, and I was wondering, is it self-explanatory? After reading Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica, it seems self-explanatory. Extensive agriculture just means youre not very efficient and so you use a lot of land to produce a given amount. Intensive agriculture means you get more efficient and use less land per unit output. Modern industrial agriculture is of course the most intense. Unclear to me if theres any kind of qualitative difference here or if its just a matter of degree. Reddit Studying agriculture, with the garage door up Six stages of agriculture Get posts by email Copyright  Jason Crawford. Some rights reserved CC BY-ND 4.0 Privacy policy Dont show again
About the blog  Writing  Speaking  Bibliography  Subscribe  Roots of Progress Institute by Jason Crawford  March 25, 2020  3 min read Im now three chapters into A History of Agriculture in Europe and America, by N. S. B. Gras. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, heres a bit of what Ive learned so far. I note at the outset that this is an old book, published 1925 and revised 1940. Probably a lot has been learned in the last 80 years and the following has already undergone revision, which Ill uncover when I read more modern sources. But Im starting with this because it seems to have the widest scope in geography and time, and I like to begin with an overview. Gras outlines six major stages of agricultural development Natural husbandry The fallow system Legume rotation Field-grass husbandry Scientific rotation Specialized intensive To understand these, you must grasp a basic challenge of agriculture all fields lose their fertility over time. If you plant a field year after year, your harvest will diminish until you can no longer sustain yourself. The six stages above are all organized around this challenge and represent increasingly advanced responses to it. In natural husbandry, the agriculturalist tills, sows and reaps, and may tend the field. When a field has been worked for a few years, and is starting to go barren, he moves to another field. Thats about it. The fallow system recognizes that fields go barren, and that they will return to fertility if left fallow for a while. Rather than abandoning fields ad hoc, a system is adopted in which fields are deliberately left to rest every, say, two or three years. Since of course a harvest is needed every year, this is done by rotating fields. For instance, in a three-field system, two fields would be worked each year and a third left fallow, and the fields would be rotated each year. The legume rotation is based on the discovery that legume crops, such as beans, peas, or alfalfa, actually help restore fertility to the soil. Thus, if they are worked into the rotation, less fallow time is needed. For instance, you can have a four-field rotation of a grain, a legume, another grain, then fallow. Now you are working three-fourths of your land in each season, instead of only two-thirds. Field-grass husbandry works pasture and meadowlands into the rotation as well. Previously these had been separated, for reasons I dont fully understand. But if you alternate crops with pasturemeadow, you can reduce or eliminate the fallowsagain, for reasons I dont fully understand. One reason may be that some grasses grown in pasture or meadow are legumes, which would help restore fertility but others are not. Also, it seems that at this stage, manure from livestock was used to help fertilize the fields. But its not clear to me why this wouldnt have been used at earlier stages. The final two stages I havent gotten to yet in the book. Presumably they involve more fertilizers, including eventually synthetic fertilizer. I imagine they also involve at some point mechanization, irrigation, pesticides and herbicides, and other modern techniques. The early stages of reading on any project like this are very exploratory. I dont know what all the topics and issues are until Ive gotten partway in. Just reading a few chapters of one book has already pointed out to me areas I neglected to list in my initial post. One is the topic of processing, or food products. Examples that date from ancient times include dairy products such as butter, cheese, yogurt, and cream other fermented products such as beer, wine, and vinegar and oils from nuts, olives, etc. I may even want to include some issues of cooking, baking, etc. but I feel the full extent of this is out of scope for my current project. The second topic is the interrelationship of agriculture and politics, or more broadly entire ways of life. Agriculture was part of the transition from a nomadic to a settled lifestyle. Although there are transitional states, agriculture made settled society both possible and necessary, and vice versa. A settled people can accumulate goods, both produce and manufactures. This is a great benefit, but also a great risk, because it invites attack from hostile peoples settlers are an attractive target for raiding nomads, both because of the treasure trove of accumulated goods, and because they cannot simply pick up and run. So settled society forced the evolution of new political structures for protection, and ultimately of hierarchies of power. Agriculture is also bound up with issues such as property rights medieval European villages, for instance, had some areas private and others in common. The evolution of political structures is also outside the scope of this project, but its important context that I was formerly only dimly aware of. Relevant books A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Comment on Reddit Social media link image credit Wikimedia  MScharwies Im now three chapters into A History of Agriculture in Europe and America, by N. S. B. Gras. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, heres a bit of what Ive learned so far. I note at the outset that this is an old book, published 1925 and revised 1940. Probably a lot has been learned in the last 80 years and the following has already undergone revision, which Ill uncover when I read more modern sources. But Im starting with this because it seems to have the widest scope in geography and time, and I like to begin with an overview. Gras outlines six major stages of agricultural development Natural husbandry The fallow system Legume rotation Field-grass husbandry Scientific rotation Specialized intensive To understand these, you must grasp a basic challenge of agriculture all fields lose their fertility over time. If you plant a field year after year, your harvest will diminish until you can no longer sustain yourself. The six stages above are all organized around this challenge and represent increasingly advanced responses to it. In natural husbandry, the agriculturalist tills, sows and reaps, and may tend the field. When a field has been worked for a few years, and is starting to go barren, he moves to another field. Thats about it. The fallow system recognizes that fields go barren, and that they will return to fertility if left fallow for a while. Rather than abandoning fields ad hoc, a system is adopted in which fields are deliberately left to rest every, say, two or three years. Since of course a harvest is needed every year, this is done by rotating fields. For instance, in a three-field system, two fields would be worked each year and a third left fallow, and the fields would be rotated each year. The legume rotation is based on the discovery that legume crops, such as beans, peas, or alfalfa, actually help restore fertility to the soil. Thus, if they are worked into the rotation, less fallow time is needed. For instance, you can have a four-field rotation of a grain, a legume, another grain, then fallow. Now you are working three-fourths of your land in each season, instead of only two-thirds. Field-grass husbandry works pasture and meadowlands into the rotation as well. Previously these had been separated, for reasons I dont fully understand. But if you alternate crops with pasturemeadow, you can reduce or eliminate the fallowsagain, for reasons I dont fully understand. One reason may be that some grasses grown in pasture or meadow are legumes, which would help restore fertility but others are not. Also, it seems that at this stage, manure from livestock was used to help fertilize the fields. But its not clear to me why this wouldnt have been used at earlier stages. The final two stages I havent gotten to yet in the book. Presumably they involve more fertilizers, including eventually synthetic fertilizer. I imagine they also involve at some point mechanization, irrigation, pesticides and herbicides, and other modern techniques. The early stages of reading on any project like this are very exploratory. I dont know what all the topics and issues are until Ive gotten partway in. Just reading a few chapters of one book has already pointed out to me areas I neglected to list in my initial post. One is the topic of processing, or food products. Examples that date from ancient times include dairy products such as butter, cheese, yogurt, and cream other fermented products such as beer, wine, and vinegar and oils from nuts, olives, etc. I may even want to include some issues of cooking, baking, etc. but I feel the full extent of this is out of scope for my current project. The second topic is the interrelationship of agriculture and politics, or more broadly entire ways of life. Agriculture was part of the transition from a nomadic to a settled lifestyle. Although there are transitional states, agriculture made settled society both possible and necessary, and vice versa. A settled people can accumulate goods, both produce and manufactures. This is a great benefit, but also a great risk, because it invites attack from hostile peoples settlers are an attractive target for raiding nomads, both because of the treasure trove of accumulated goods, and because they cannot simply pick up and run. So settled society forced the evolution of new political structures for protection, and ultimately of hierarchies of power. Agriculture is also bound up with issues such as property rights medieval European villages, for instance, had some areas private and others in common. The evolution of political structures is also outside the scope of this project, but its important context that I was formerly only dimly aware of. Relevant books A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Comment on Reddit Social media link image credit Wikimedia  MScharwies Im now three chapters into A History of Agriculture in Europe and America, by N. S. B. Gras. In the spirit of working with the garage door up, heres a bit of what Ive learned so far. I note at the outset that this is an old book, published 1925 and revised 1940. Probably a lot has been learned in the last 80 years and the following has already undergone revision, which Ill uncover when I read more modern sources. But Im starting with this because it seems to have the widest scope in geography and time, and I like to begin with an overview. Gras outlines six major stages of agricultural development To understand these, you must grasp a basic challenge of agriculture all fields lose their fertility over time. If you plant a field year after year, your harvest will diminish until you can no longer sustain yourself. The six stages above are all organized around this challenge and represent increasingly advanced responses to it. In natural husbandry, the agriculturalist tills, sows and reaps, and may tend the field. When a field has been worked for a few years, and is starting to go barren, he moves to another field. Thats about it. The fallow system recognizes that fields go barren, and that they will return to fertility if left fallow for a while. Rather than abandoning fields ad hoc, a system is adopted in which fields are deliberately left to rest every, say, two or three years. Since of course a harvest is needed every year, this is done by rotating fields. For instance, in a three-field system, two fields would be worked each year and a third left fallow, and the fields would be rotated each year. The legume rotation is based on the discovery that legume crops, such as beans, peas, or alfalfa, actually help restore fertility to the soil. Thus, if they are worked into the rotation, less fallow time is needed. For instance, you can have a four-field rotation of a grain, a legume, another grain, then fallow. Now you are working three-fourths of your land in each season, instead of only two-thirds. Field-grass husbandry works pasture and meadowlands into the rotation as well. Previously these had been separated, for reasons I dont fully understand. But if you alternate crops with pasturemeadow, you can reduce or eliminate the fallowsagain, for reasons I dont fully understand. One reason may be that some grasses grown in pasture or meadow are legumes, which would help restore fertility but others are not. Also, it seems that at this stage, manure from livestock was used to help fertilize the fields. But its not clear to me why this wouldnt have been used at earlier stages. The final two stages I havent gotten to yet in the book. Presumably they involve more fertilizers, including eventually synthetic fertilizer. I imagine they also involve at some point mechanization, irrigation, pesticides and herbicides, and other modern techniques. The early stages of reading on any project like this are very exploratory. I dont know what all the topics and issues are until Ive gotten partway in. Just reading a few chapters of one book has already pointed out to me areas I neglected to list in my initial post. One is the topic of processing, or food products. Examples that date from ancient times include dairy products such as butter, cheese, yogurt, and cream other fermented products such as beer, wine, and vinegar and oils from nuts, olives, etc. I may even want to include some issues of cooking, baking, etc. but I feel the full extent of this is out of scope for my current project. The second topic is the interrelationship of agriculture and politics, or more broadly entire ways of life. Agriculture was part of the transition from a nomadic to a settled lifestyle. Although there are transitional states, agriculture made settled society both possible and necessary, and vice versa. A settled people can accumulate goods, both produce and manufactures. This is a great benefit, but also a great risk, because it invites attack from hostile peoples settlers are an attractive target for raiding nomads, both because of the treasure trove of accumulated goods, and because they cannot simply pick up and run. So settled society forced the evolution of new political structures for protection, and ultimately of hierarchies of power. Agriculture is also bound up with issues such as property rights medieval European villages, for instance, had some areas private and others in common. The evolution of political structures is also outside the scope of this project, but its important context that I was formerly only dimly aware of. A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Reddit Social media link image credit Wikimedia  MScharwies Some agricultural terminology Whats the deal with enclosures? Get posts by email Copyright  Jason Crawford. Some rights reserved CC BY-ND 4.0 Privacy policy Dont show again
About the blog  Writing  Speaking  Bibliography  Subscribe  Roots of Progress Institute by Jason Crawford  March 29, 2020  2 min read In a previous post I wrote about the early stages of agriculture. These stages are defined by a succession of solutions to the fertility problem every harvest takes fertility out of the soil without active management, fields lose their productivity over time. The early stages were all about crop rotation. First, fields would rotate between crops and fallow. Animals were grazed in pasture in the summer, and in winter, fed on hay harvested from the meadow. Later, crops and pasture themselves were rotated. Historian Norman Gras, whose book A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Im reading now, identifies two further stages scientific rotation and specialized intensive. The term scientific rotation seems to me a misnomer its not clear how it depends on science, especially since Gras says that versions of it arose in places including ancient China and medieval Lombardy. Perhaps it could be called optimized rotation or advanced rotation. In any case, Gras identifies a number of advanced rotation techniques, including Planting crops and plowing them under, instead of simply leaving a field fallow. Clover, for example, can be planted and then plowed under instead of harvested, before planting wheat in the following season. The clover decomposes under the soil and provides nutrients for the wheat. Choosing the rotation to foil weeds and parasites. For instance, wheat, barley and rye can all suffer from rust, a fungal disease, and the fungus can stay in the soil after the grain is harvested. It helps to fight the fungus if the wheat is followed by a different plant not susceptible to rust. There is some similar way in which weeds are defeated by rotation Im not totally clear on it, but it has to do with the lifecycle of the weed and which crops it matches with, or doesnt. Choosing a variety of crops with different root lengths, to use moisture and nutrients at all levels of the soil. Choosing a portfolio of crops with different growing seasons, to even out labor requirements during the year. For livestock, switching from grazing on pasture to fodder in the barn. Pasturing is inefficient the animals dont eat all the grass in the field, they trample some of it, they leave their droppings in the grass. More efficient is to treat animals like humans grow their food in the field, harvest it, and feed it to them directly. This also allows you to plan and optimize their diet. Further, manure can be collected directly and used as fertilizer where needed. In English agricultural history, a well-known scientific rotation was the Norfolk rotation clover, wheat, turnips, and barley in that order. Again, the clover was plowed under for the wheat. The turnips were fodder for livestock. Gras is less clear on what specialized intensive means, although one key sentence reads By watering, fertilizing, and heating the ground, by soil pulverization, seed selection, treating seed chemically or bacteriologically, transplanting, protection by glass, and intertillage, enormous crops can be attained. Owing to techniques including the above, agricultural productivity grew so fast in Britain from the mid-1600s to mid-1800s that the period is known as the British Agricultural Revolution. Gras is sketchy on details, but a few key ones include Natural fertilizers, including imported guano which you may recall from the story of synthetic fertilizer The seed drill, a machine for seeding that placed seeds carefully at regular intervals, in contrast to the primitive method of scattering them by hand Other machinery for harvesting, including the reaper and the threshing machine Im going to have to do more research into the above topics. As a reminder, Im experimenting with a style in which I write shorter and less polished posts more frequently while Im in the middle of researching a topic. If you dont have time for these posts, feel free to skim or skip them at the end of this process Ill write a more authoritative longform summary of the topic. Relevant books A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Comment on Reddit In a previous post I wrote about the early stages of agriculture. These stages are defined by a succession of solutions to the fertility problem every harvest takes fertility out of the soil without active management, fields lose their productivity over time. The early stages were all about crop rotation. First, fields would rotate between crops and fallow. Animals were grazed in pasture in the summer, and in winter, fed on hay harvested from the meadow. Later, crops and pasture themselves were rotated. Historian Norman Gras, whose book A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Im reading now, identifies two further stages scientific rotation and specialized intensive. The term scientific rotation seems to me a misnomer its not clear how it depends on science, especially since Gras says that versions of it arose in places including ancient China and medieval Lombardy. Perhaps it could be called optimized rotation or advanced rotation. In any case, Gras identifies a number of advanced rotation techniques, including Planting crops and plowing them under, instead of simply leaving a field fallow. Clover, for example, can be planted and then plowed under instead of harvested, before planting wheat in the following season. The clover decomposes under the soil and provides nutrients for the wheat. Choosing the rotation to foil weeds and parasites. For instance, wheat, barley and rye can all suffer from rust, a fungal disease, and the fungus can stay in the soil after the grain is harvested. It helps to fight the fungus if the wheat is followed by a different plant not susceptible to rust. There is some similar way in which weeds are defeated by rotation Im not totally clear on it, but it has to do with the lifecycle of the weed and which crops it matches with, or doesnt. Choosing a variety of crops with different root lengths, to use moisture and nutrients at all levels of the soil. Choosing a portfolio of crops with different growing seasons, to even out labor requirements during the year. For livestock, switching from grazing on pasture to fodder in the barn. Pasturing is inefficient the animals dont eat all the grass in the field, they trample some of it, they leave their droppings in the grass. More efficient is to treat animals like humans grow their food in the field, harvest it, and feed it to them directly. This also allows you to plan and optimize their diet. Further, manure can be collected directly and used as fertilizer where needed. In English agricultural history, a well-known scientific rotation was the Norfolk rotation clover, wheat, turnips, and barley in that order. Again, the clover was plowed under for the wheat. The turnips were fodder for livestock. Gras is less clear on what specialized intensive means, although one key sentence reads By watering, fertilizing, and heating the ground, by soil pulverization, seed selection, treating seed chemically or bacteriologically, transplanting, protection by glass, and intertillage, enormous crops can be attained. Owing to techniques including the above, agricultural productivity grew so fast in Britain from the mid-1600s to mid-1800s that the period is known as the British Agricultural Revolution. Gras is sketchy on details, but a few key ones include Natural fertilizers, including imported guano which you may recall from the story of synthetic fertilizer The seed drill, a machine for seeding that placed seeds carefully at regular intervals, in contrast to the primitive method of scattering them by hand Other machinery for harvesting, including the reaper and the threshing machine Im going to have to do more research into the above topics. As a reminder, Im experimenting with a style in which I write shorter and less polished posts more frequently while Im in the middle of researching a topic. If you dont have time for these posts, feel free to skim or skip them at the end of this process Ill write a more authoritative longform summary of the topic. Relevant books A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Comment on Reddit In a previous post I wrote about the early stages of agriculture. These stages are defined by a succession of solutions to the fertility problem every harvest takes fertility out of the soil without active management, fields lose their productivity over time. The early stages were all about crop rotation. First, fields would rotate between crops and fallow. Animals were grazed in pasture in the summer, and in winter, fed on hay harvested from the meadow. Later, crops and pasture themselves were rotated. Historian Norman Gras, whose book A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Im reading now, identifies two further stages scientific rotation and specialized intensive. The term scientific rotation seems to me a misnomer its not clear how it depends on science, especially since Gras says that versions of it arose in places including ancient China and medieval Lombardy. Perhaps it could be called optimized rotation or advanced rotation. In any case, Gras identifies a number of advanced rotation techniques, including Planting crops and plowing them under, instead of simply leaving a field fallow. Clover, for example, can be planted and then plowed under instead of harvested, before planting wheat in the following season. The clover decomposes under the soil and provides nutrients for the wheat. Choosing the rotation to foil weeds and parasites. For instance, wheat, barley and rye can all suffer from rust, a fungal disease, and the fungus can stay in the soil after the grain is harvested. It helps to fight the fungus if the wheat is followed by a different plant not susceptible to rust. There is some similar way in which weeds are defeated by rotation Im not totally clear on it, but it has to do with the lifecycle of the weed and which crops it matches with, or doesnt. Choosing a variety of crops with different root lengths, to use moisture and nutrients at all levels of the soil. Choosing a portfolio of crops with different growing seasons, to even out labor requirements during the year. For livestock, switching from grazing on pasture to fodder in the barn. Pasturing is inefficient the animals dont eat all the grass in the field, they trample some of it, they leave their droppings in the grass. More efficient is to treat animals like humans grow their food in the field, harvest it, and feed it to them directly. This also allows you to plan and optimize their diet. Further, manure can be collected directly and used as fertilizer where needed. In English agricultural history, a well-known scientific rotation was the Norfolk rotation clover, wheat, turnips, and barley in that order. Again, the clover was plowed under for the wheat. The turnips were fodder for livestock. Gras is less clear on what specialized intensive means, although one key sentence reads By watering, fertilizing, and heating the ground, by soil pulverization, seed selection, treating seed chemically or bacteriologically, transplanting, protection by glass, and intertillage, enormous crops can be attained. Owing to techniques including the above, agricultural productivity grew so fast in Britain from the mid-1600s to mid-1800s that the period is known as the British Agricultural Revolution. Gras is sketchy on details, but a few key ones include Natural fertilizers, including imported guano which you may recall from the story of synthetic fertilizer The seed drill, a machine for seeding that placed seeds carefully at regular intervals, in contrast to the primitive method of scattering them by hand Other machinery for harvesting, including the reaper and the threshing machine Im going to have to do more research into the above topics. As a reminder, Im experimenting with a style in which I write shorter and less polished posts more frequently while Im in the middle of researching a topic. If you dont have time for these posts, feel free to skim or skip them at the end of this process Ill write a more authoritative longform summary of the topic. A History of Agriculture in Europe and America Reddit Definite vs. indefinite optimism as a false dichotomy Pandemics and progress Get posts by email Copyright  Jason Crawford. Some rights reserved CC BY-ND 4.0 Privacy policy Dont show again
Farm  Food Care Ontario is involved in the development of strategies to reduce nutrient runoff from agricultural lands in the Great Lakes. The Great Lakes are the largest system of fresh surface water on earth, containing about 21 of the global resource. The Great Lakes basin covers an area of more than 765,000 square kilometres 295,000 square miles and is home to 35.4 million people. Originally signed in 1972, the Canada-United States Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement has fostered cooperation toward protecting and restoring this important resource. The Agreement was recently amended in 2012. The Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement promotes advancement in areas of concern, lake wide management, and science, as well as targeted commitments to address legacy and emerging issues such as aquatic invasive species, climate change impacts, nutrients, chemicals and other environmental concerns related to Great Lakes water quality. For further information, please visit httpbinational.net.
We invite you to watch all three videos in the Manure Innovation series where we investigate how to get the best out of current systems, explore innovative new technologies to increase our dollar return, lower costs and potentially reduce greenhouse gas production. Milk Producer, December 2020 Lilian Schaer Wheat also opens new avenues of weed control, particularly for problem weeds like sow thistle, dandelion, fleabane or quackgrass Ontario Dairy Farmer, September 2020 Lilian Schaer Fears of crop damage are largely unfounded Ontario Hog Farmer, August 2020 Lilian Schaer A project looking at manure on forages on eight sites over four cuts found a yield boost of more than 12 per cent when manure was spread on alfalfa Ontario Dairy Farmer, July 2020 Lilian Schaer The maximum value is in farms up to eight or nine kilometers apart Ontario Dairy Farmer, May 2020 Lilian Schaer Studies are showing there is too much risk of soil compaction Ontario Dairy Farmer, April 2020 Lilian Schaer longer dry periods reduce production while maintaining future production capacity Ontario Dairy Farmer, July 2020 Lilian Schaer Discovery Farms, University of Wisconsin J.Laporte, OMAFRA S. Safferman, Michigan State University It is important to consider all nutrients sources applied to ensure crop nutrient requirements are met while optimizing plant nutrient uptake and reducing nutrient loss. The application of manure should be considered when developing a 4R Nutrient Management plan to cooperatively provide a crop with the Right Source and Right Rate of nutrients at the Right Time and in the Right Place. Ontario has been a leader in nutrient management planning for crop production. The province has embraced 4R Nutrient Stewardship a valuable tool for meeting the provinces agricultural and environmental goals. 4R Nutrient Stewardship is a recognized part of the Ontario Governments strategy to reduce nutrient runoff. The Ontario agriculture industry has proactively developed an industry-led 4R Certification program for agri-retailers which translates 4R Nutrient Stewardship into a set of auditable criteria. Farmers know farming best. Make the most of your investment. Learn more about 4R Nutrient Stewardship at www.fertilizercanada.ca or connect with your local 4R Certified Agri Retailers or Certified crop advisor in your area for more information. How to collect manure samples for nutrient analysis NEED HELP WITH YOUR NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLANNING? Find your local Nutrient Management Consultant
In Ontario, farmers are blessed with a diversity of soil types and climate conditions that allow them to grow a wide variety of crops. They face common challenges such as building soil organic matter and fertility  but also deal with conditions unique to their topography, climate, and geographic location. Follow along with Ontario farmers to learn how they address economic and soil health challenges on their farms, each using their own unique approach, and to see how theyre prioritizing soil health on the land they care for. This six-part video series will explore the challenges and benefits of strip-tillage implementation, as well as success stories from four Ontario farmers. This twelve-part video series will explore the challenges of soil management, as well as practices that improve soil health and increase productivity. This project was led by Farm  Food Care with the generous cooperation of Ontario farmers. This project was funded by the Canadian Agricultural Partnership, a five-year federal-provincial-territorial initiative.
There has been growing public scrutiny of agriculture and its impact on the environment, challenging farmers to focus on sustainability. Ontarios farmers are rising to meet this challenge with innovative farming practices that improve soils and protect the environment, while still maintaining high levels of food production. This environmental challenge is also coming at a time of tremendous change in Ontario agriculture. In Ontario, over 35 4 million acres of farmland is currently on the rental market. Land prices and farmland rental rates have soared in many areas across the province and to a price that is unsustainable for many farmers. But what does this have to do with the environment? Evidence shows that rented land may not be managed with the same long-term perspective as land that is farmer-owned. For farmers, short-term rental contracts conflict with the fact that the soil health and economic benefits of good farming practices are only realized in the long term All this is to say that landlords and renting farmers will play an ever increasing role when it comes to the sustainability of agriculture and this site is a resource for both parties to explore their options. Select options below for farmer-renters, for landlords or for all farmland owners looking to protect their properties for the long-term. You can also jump to videos and resources directly from the Resources tab. And you can click here for a link to our FarmerLandowner Discussion Check List.
ONfruit Information for Ontario fruit growers ONfruit by Rebecca Shortt, Engineer, Water Quantity, OMAFRA , 30 June 2016 This blog post will show the 2 steps to roughly calculate how long to run a drip system. First calculate the plant water demand. This was shown in my post from last week. Plant Water Demand U.S. gal ET mm x Kc x Area occupied by plant ft2 x conversion factor 0.0245 Second, divide the GallonsPlantDay by the number of emitters per plant x emitter flow rate. Daily Run Time  Daily Plant Water Demand   Emittersplant x Flow Rate  Strawberry example in Woodstock Step 1 ET June 23-29  30mm7days  4.3 mm Kc  0.75 Area  1 x 4  4 ft2 Plant Water Demand  ET mm x Kc x Area ft2 x conversion factor 0.0245 4.3 mm x 0.75 x 4 ft2 x 0.0245 0.32 GallonsPlantDay Step 2 Emittersplant  plant spacing  emitter spacing  1 ft  1ft  1 Flow rate of Emitter  0.42 gph gallons per hour Daily Run Time  Daily Plant Water Demand   Emittersplant x Flow Rate 0.32 GallonsPlantDay  1 x 0.42 gph 0.76 hours per Day  Apple 3 x 12 mature with sod example in Leamington Step 1 ET June 23-29  31mm7days  4.4mm Kc  1.0 Im using a higher Kc because I think were closer to full canopy than the chart value would suggest Area  3 x 12  36 ft2 Plant Water Demand  ET mm x Kc x Area ft2 x conversion factor 0.0245 4.4 mm x 1.0 x 36 ft2 x 0.0245 3.9 GallonsPlantDay Step 2 Emittersplant  plant spacing  emitter spacing  3 ft  2 ft  1.5 Flow rate of Emitter  0.63 gph gallons per hour Daily Run Time  Daily Plant Water Demand   Emittersplant x Flow Rate 3.9 GallonsPlantDay  1.5 x 0.63 gph 4.1 hours per Day  Crop Factors for Fruit Kc Modified from the B.C. Trickle Irrigation Manual by Ted Van der Gulik Early Spring Crop Factors for Fruit Trees Kc  Surely the area in a 12x 3 orchard is not the 36sq ft you mention. Three quarters of the area in a high density orchard is roadways for tractors , why are you worried about the grass area, we know very few tree roots will extend into grass sod . A more accurate plant area would be 7 sq ft  area of 3 ft circle . Ok lets say 10sq ft . On your calculations a 12x 3 orchard 1200 trees  needs 3.9gallons plant day . Lets say 4 gallons so 4 x 1200 trees  4800gollons  acre day . On a 75 acre orchard thats 75x 4800 360,000 gallons every day! Thats an Olympic swimming pool every day that has to be pumped and filtered or 250gallonsminute every minute of every day. So much for the energy and water conserving of drip. Hi Paul  thanks for your comment! this reply was prepared by Rebecca Shortt- Yes, with a high density orchard the entire plant spacing area ex. 123 is not covered in canopy so growers can experiment with reducing the value for canopy area in the calculation, which will bring the calculated irrigation demand down. However we have a lot of intercepted solar energy on that vertical wall of canopy and that is driving the plant water use. I suggest that growers wanting to reduce the volume of water applied, start with 75 of the area and be extremely cautious about dropping below 30 the 10sq ft suggested. Drip irrigation in Ontario usually doesnt conserve a significant amount of water over overhead. This is primarily because with overhead irrigation fields are generally under-irrigated not starting early enough and not coming back often enough. This under irrigation leads to crop stress and reduced productivity. Drip irrigation does make the most effective use of water, often increasing productivity with reduced operating energy costs lower pressure amongst other benefits see video about advantages and disadvantages of drip irrigation httpwww.omafra.gov.on.caenglishengineerfactsir-vid.htm Irrigation does consume large amounts of water. Robust water supplies are required. Nicee post thanks for sharing This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. Interests Everything Apples Berries Grapes Tender Fruit  Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Continue reading
Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience. To have a better experience, you need to Learn how to select and calibrate the irrigation instrument best suited for the operation and interpret the results. This technical information is for commercial crop producers in Ontario. ISSN 1198-712X, Published June 2011 Monitoring soil moisture is the key to getting the right amount of water to crops at the right time. Use this fact sheet to select the instrument best suited for the operation. Learn how to calibrate the instrument and interpret the resulting measurements. Monitoring soil moisture can help growers manage soil moisture. Choosing the right times and the right amounts to irrigate can lead to Water and nutrients are used most efficiently when an irrigation event applies only the amount of water the crop needs and the soil can hold. Considering the time it takes to irrigate, it makes sense to spend time taking soil moisture measurements to improve irrigation decisions. The two main points to consider in selecting an instrument to monitor soil moisture are A variety of instruments are available for collecting soil moisture information Instruments FDR1,TDR2 How to use This tool is best suited to growers who are walking the fields regularly and want to record measurements manually. A crop scout or other consultant can use this style of instrument to offer a soil moisture monitoring service. Multiple locations in the field can be measured. Instruments Electrical resistance blocks, Tensiometer, TDR, FDR, capacitance How to use This instrument requires growers to walk the fields regularly and record measurements manually. A consultant or scout can gather the readings and produce the data for the farm. Instruments Capacitance, Electrical resistance blocks, FDR, TDR, Tensiometer How to use The data is manually downloaded from the data logger to a home computer. Some instruments have software that automatically makes graphs of the data and interpret the results. Continuous readings allow the irrigation manager to see trends and response to rainfall and irrigation. Instruments Capacitance Electrical resistance blocks FDR TDR Tensiometer How to use Some instruments have software that automatically makes graphs of the data and interprets the results. Some consultants offer this type of service online. Continuous readings allow the irrigation manager to see trends and response to rainfall and irrigation. Instruments Capacitance, Electrical resistance blocks, FDR, TDR, Tensiometer How to use Soil moisture instrument continually takes readings. When soil moisture reaches a user set trigger point, the irrigation is automatically initiated. Well suited to growers comfortable with automation. 1 Frequency domain reflectometry 2 Time domain reflectometry Soil moisture monitoring costs range from 100 to 3,000 per monitoring location, depending on the type manual versus automated and number of instruments. Generally, one monitoring location is used per field, but multiple locations may be necessary to provide information from large fields with variable conditions or management practices. More monitoring means more information on which to base irrigation decisions. Considering the cost of irrigation fuel and labour, it makes sense to invest in soil moisture instruments that increase the effectiveness of irrigation applications. The amount of time it takes to monitor soil moisture depends on the amount of information required and whether you are using manual or automated instruments. Collect data between irrigation events and more frequently daily as the chosen irrigation trigger point approaches. Check data during or after an irrigation event to verify if the right amount of water was applied. Using manual instruments requires visiting the monitoring locations and recording the readings. Someone already walking the fields regularly that is, a field scout could do this. Making graphs of the readings takes additional time. Many of the automated instruments can be set up to send readings directly to a remote computer, and some will automatically produce graphs. Allow time for calibrating soil moisture instruments at the start of the growing season. Installing soil moisture monitoring equipment at the beginning of the season can take several hours, depending on the number of instruments. It is important to make this job a priority as soon as the crop is planted. OMAFRA experience shows that many growers start irrigating too late. Soil moisture monitoring can demonstrate when irrigation should begin, and, equally important, when it should end. Instruments that use wireless transmission technology to send data remotely to a remote computer for example, the farm office may require installation by a service provider Figure 1. Typically, it takes a few weeks, over at least three irrigation events, to learn what the soil moisture readings mean for each field and crop and how they should affect your irrigation decisions. Place the soil moisture sensor in a representative area of the field. If the field is not uniform, choose a location that tends to be a bit drier than average or divide the field into zones, each with its own soil moisture instrument and unique management. Always locate sensors in areas of dense roots. Place sensors between sprinkler rows or traveller lanes, halfway between sprinklers. For drip irrigation, place the sensor about halfway between the emitter and the outer edge of the wetting front in an area of dense roots. For production under plastic, place the sensor under the plastic. The primary sensor depth should be similar to the crop rooting depth generally 1530 cm. For deep rooted crops, two sensor depths may be needed. Place a second sensor at the bottom of the root zone to determine if the irrigation applied is enough, too much or too little. Before and after irrigating, take note of the soil moisture. If the bottom sensor is showing lots of response to the irrigation event, less water is required. If the bottom sensor shows no response to the irrigation event, the amount of water applied is adequate or could be increased. Careful attention to the bottom sensor will prevent irrigation water and potentially nutrients from being lost to drainage tile. Field capacity As much water as the soil can hold, 2 or 3days after it has been saturated by rainfall. At this point, there is very little downward movement of soil water due to gravity and very little suction due to capillary action. Permanent wilting point The amount of water remaining in the soil when the plant wilts in a humid atmosphere. The water remaining in the soil is held tightly by soil particles, and plant roots cannot absorb it. Available soil water The amount of water in the soil between field capacity and the permanent wilting point. Generally, overhead irrigation should start before soil reaches 50 of available soil water. Drip irrigation should start before soil reaches 80 of available soil water Figure 2. The amount of water available to the plants depends on the texture of the soil. The field capacity and permanent wilting points are shown in Figure 3 for various soil textures. Loam soils are usually highly valued for their consistent crop production. Note that the greatest amount of crop available water is in the loam-to-silt loam texture. Soil moisture instruments provide readings in several units, such as percent  water by volume, centibars or as dimensionless trends. Figure 3 provides an interpretation of soil moisture readings presented as  water by volume. Use Figure 4 to determine how much water has depleted since the last rainirrigation 0 is wet, 100 is dry when readings are provided in centibars. Calibration is important for interpretation but even more critical for those instruments that just display trends. Example A sandy loam soil has 90 available soil moisture at a soil moisture tension of 13 centibars and at 50 available soil moisture at a soil moisture tension of 40 centibars. OMAFRA experience suggests that overhead irrigation be triggered before 50 of available soil water is depleted and drip irrigation be triggered before 20 of available soil water is depleted that is, at 80 available water. Know the field capacity and permanent wilting point of your soil using the charts or through in-field calibration or laboratory analysis. Choose how much depletion to allow. Begin irrigation when the field hits this trigger point. With all instruments, graphs of the soil moisture are used to analyze the data for trends. An irrigation event or significant rainfall will cause the soil moisture to spike. Following an irrigation event, the soil moisture can drop quickly, depending on the crop growth stage. As the soil dries out, the soil moisture will continue to drop more slowly. This is an indication that it is more difficult for the plant to take water out of the soil and that further irrigation is needed. Instruments that provide continuous measurements log data or transmit to a computer are best suited to this analysis. Graphs based on the soil texture are used to determine the need to irrigate Figures 3  4, however, a simplified in-field calibration is superior. Soak the area around the soil moisture instrument and take a reading 24 hr later the drainage time required is longer for fine textured soils such as clays. This reading is the field capacity maximum. The permanent wilting point minimum is assumed as approximately 50 of the field capacity maximum. The permanent wilting point minimum is refined by analyzing the readings over the season or by sending an undisturbed soil core sample for laboratory analysis to determine the permanent wilting point. A variety of soil moisture monitoring instruments can help collect accurate data. Select the instrument that best suits the farm operation. Simplicity of use easy Reliability reliable Measurement units centibars Range of soil types most, except clays Manual infield reading yes Potential for automation yes Portability buried for crop season but moveable from season to season Observations Cost low cost usually two units at two different depths Simplicity of use very easy Reliability reliable Measurement units centibars Range of soil types most, except clays, gravel, very coarse sand or peat Manual infield reading yes  need hand-held digital reader Potential for automation yes Portability buried for crop season but moveable from season to season Observations Cost medium cost for meter and individual units, usually two units at two different depths. Simplicity of use somewhat easy, depends on unit used Reliability reliable Measurement units volumetric soil moisture  or trends comparison Range of soil types all, but clays may pose some problems Manual infield reading some yes, some no Potential for automation yes Portability Various, depending on the model Observations Cost high cost, cost has come down in recent years The tensiometer reads the soil water tension or suction, in centibars. The higher the tension, the drier the soil. The tensiometer is made of a closed plastic tube with a ceramic tip attached to one end, and a vacuum gauge with an air-tight seal at the other end. The tube is filled with water and sealed. When the ceramic tip comes to equilibrium with the surrounding soil, the gauge registers the soil water tension. Install tensiometers carefully to ensure that the ceramic tip is in contact with the soil. Use a soil sampling tube to drill a hole to the proper depth. Partially fill the hole with a slurry of soil and water. Gently, push the tensiometer into the hole until it reaches the bottom Figure 5. Do not touch the ceramic tip, as the grease from fingers can interfere with the water movement across the ceramic tipsoil interface. Routine maintenance is important. The liquid in the tube must be refilled and air bubbles removed with a hand pump. Some newer models have lower maintenance requirements. Record readings manually from the analogue or digital display or connect instruments to data loggers or communications equipment and send the data to the farm office computer Figure 6. Use the graph from Figure4 to interpret the readings from the tensiometer. These units measure soil water tension in centibars, similar to tensiometer readings. They measure the electrical resistance to current flow between electrodes embedded in a material resembling fine sand, surrounded by a synthetic porous material. Carefully install electrical resistance blocks to ensure that the blocks are in contact with the soil. Use a soil sampling tube to drill a hole to the proper depth. Partially fill the hole with a slurry of soil and water. Push the block into the hole until it reaches the bottom, leaving the attached wires above the soil surface Figures 7 and 8. Replace the soil above the block, and firmly pat it into place. Flag each unit for easy access. In the field, attach a hand-held digital reader to the wires to read the data. The wires may also be connected to a data logger or communications equipment and sent to the farm office computer. Install the sensors in the soil, to any depth, in groups of two. Because they require good contact with soil, they are not suited to gravelly, sandy or peat soils. Use the graph from Figure 4 to interpret the readings. Time domain reflectometry is a relatively new way to measure soil moisture. Probes inserted into the soil measure the velocity of electromagnetic waves in the soil Figure 9. These waves are slowed by soil moisture. The measurements are very accurate, and the equipment comes factory-calibrated. Because soil texture also influences the velocity of the waves, these units are not practical in soils with high clay content. The disadvantage to TDR technology is that complex electronics and expensive equipment are required, as well as some in-field calibration. Portable TDR sensors give almost instant readings and may be shaft mounted or hand-held Figure 10. Take care when inserting the probes, as the equipment is calibrated based upon a set distance between the electrodes. If the electrodes become bent, measurements may not be accurate. Some come with internal data loggers that allow automated recording of the soil moisture values in the field. Bury non-portable types of TDR instruments in one place for the duration of the growing season. Wires from the instrument protrude above the ground and can be read with a portable meter, connected to a data logger or connected to communications equipment and sent to the farm office computer. Frequency domain reflectometry is similar to time domain reflectometry. Capacitance-based technology has been gaining in popularity because instruments are now available and provide continuous readings, but they are primarily used in research trials due to the expense. Current capacitance probes are designed for installation in a fixed location in the field for the entire season. They are compatible with high levels of automation andor telemetry. Cost often limits the number of capacitance probes used. Careful site selection with the probe is critical to ensure representative information for the field monitored. Many capacitance probes are used by installing a waterproof access tube and inserting the probe into the tube the tubes are generally installed in permanent locations that are not moved from year to year. Numerous moisture-sensing points may be fixed along the length of the probe to give readings at various depths specific to your crop roots Figure 11. Some capacitance probes are buried directly in the ground with wires protruding above the ground. These are read with a portable meter, connected to a data logger or communications equipment and sent to the farm office computer. Soil moisture monitoring can help growers efficiently use and apply water and nutrients. All soil moisture instruments provide data that help a grower make good decisions about how much water to apply and when to apply it. The right soil moisture monitoring instrument for the farm is one that suits the management style of the grower. If it suits the grower, it will get used, and the data will inform the irrigation decisions. This fact sheet was written by Rebecca Shortt, P.Eng., irrigation engineer, OMAFRA, Simcoe, Anne Verhallen, soil management specialist, OMAFRA, Ridgetown, and Pam Fisher, berry crop specialist, OMAFRA, Simcoe. Unleashing the potential of Ontarios rural, agriculture and food systems by developing vibrant rural economies, making sure our agriculture is sustainable, and supporting the growth of our agri-food system. There are many ways to contact the Government of Ontario.
Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience. To have a better experience, you need to Learn about irrigation scheduling for tomatoes using soil moisture monitoring and water budgeting. This information is for commercial tomato growers in Ontario. ISSN 1198-712X, Published April 2008. Ontario produces over 98 of the total Canadian field tomato crop. Almost 90 of the Ontario crop is grown in the southern counties of Essex, Chatham-Kent and Haldimand-Norfolk. Tomatoes are the number one field vegetable excluding potatoes in farm value in the province, worth about 71 million in 2007. Most field tomatoes in Ontario are grown on relatively light soils, which produce earlier crops and facilitate mechanical harvesting of tomatoes grown for processing. This factsheet provides an introduction to irrigation scheduling for tomatoes, introducing the basics of two methods of irrigation scheduling soil moisture monitoring and water budgeting. Transplanted field tomatoes are a long-season crop with high water requirements. An average cultivar requires about 40 cm 15.7 in. of water over the growing season. Rainfall during the Ontario growing season is very irregular, typically ranging from 200700 mm 7.927.6 in. in total from May to September. In many years, rainfall does not supply the tomato crop with sufficient water for optimum yields. In fact, since the early 1980s, there has been a trend of decreasing precipitation during the growing season in southern Ontario. Available soil moisture is the amount of water a soil can hold that is accessible or available to the crop. Evapotranspiration is the amount of water transpired by the plant and evaporated from crop and soil surfaces. Field capacity is the amount of water held in a soil after the excess has drained by gravity following a saturating rainfall. Permanent wilting point is the point of available soil water below which plants wilt beyond recovery. Soil saturation is the state at which every soil pore is filled with water. Soils never stay this way for long. Irrigation of tomatoes can result in higher and more consistent yields, better quality, larger fruit, less blossom-end rot and less cracking. Recent research on processing tomatoes in Ontario has shown yield increases of up to 81 on a range of soil types with the use of properly scheduled irrigation. Tomato yields increased with irrigation in both wet and dry years and on sandy soils as well as on clay loams Figure 1. On light soils, with their low water-holding capacity, the tomato crop can be very responsive to irrigation, but correct scheduling will provide maximum benefit. Proper scheduling is critical when irrigating tomatoes on heavier soils. One consideration for tomatoes grown for paste is that solids, especially soluble solids, tend to be lower when the crop is irrigated. Figure 2 summarizes some Ontario irrigation research that examined solids. In these trials, irrigation on heavier soils did not reduce solids as much as irrigation on lighter soils. Research into deficit irrigation and early irrigation cut-off dates may result in the development of strategies to maximize fruit solids and water use efficiency under irrigated systems on both heavy and light soils. The maximum benefit from irrigation is achieved when the proper amount of water is applied at the right time, minimizing moisture stress while avoiding overwatering. Choosing the right irrigation system requires more than grower experience. To be most effective, your irrigation system should be designed by experts. In Ontario, two primary methods are used for the in-field distribution of irrigation water The appropriate frequency of irrigation and amount of water applied are quite different between these two irrigation methods. These differences must be considered in irrigation scheduling. Each irrigation system also has inherent advantages and disadvantages Table 1. Tomatoes have a branching, fibrous root system, rather than one main tap root. In good soil conditions, roots will penetrate beyond 1 m 39 in. in depth, but the majority of the active root zone in most Ontario soils is in the top 45 cm 18 in. the greatest concentration of roots is in the upper 30 cm 12 in.. Figure 3 shows typical daily water use by irrigated tomatoes through the growing season. Crop growth stage has a dramatic impact on water uptake. The most critical periods for irrigation are during flowering, fruit set and fruit sizing. Moisture stress or irregular water supply during these growth stages can result in fewer flowers per truss, blossom and fruit drop, reduced fruit set, small fruit, blossom-end rot and fruit cracking. Use early-season irrigation only as necessary, as it can cool the soil excessively and move fertilizer out of reach of the developing root system. Once plants are established and soil temperatures have warmed up, watering can occur more frequently, based on soil moisture measurements or meteorological data the water budget approach. A crops water requirement can be expressed as evapotranspiration ET. This is the amount of water transpired by the plant and evaporated from the soil surface. ET may be expressed as millimetres or inches of water used per day and is affected by temperature, light intensity, wind, humidity, crop cover and crop growth stage. For optimum crop production, the water use ET must be replenished by irrigation or rainfall. Soil characteristics play a major role in irrigation scheduling. Coarse-textured soils such as sands hold less crop-available water than fine-textured soils, such as clays. Soil texture refers to the proportion of sand, silt and clay in a soil. If the texture of a field is in question, it can best be determined through particle size distribution tests from a soil test laboratory. Hand-texturing can also be a useful technique. For more information, see OMAFRAs Best Management Practices Soil Management, BMP06. Table 2 shows available soil moisture for various soil textures. The lowest moisture level at which plant roots are able to extract moisture from the soil before they wilt beyond recovery is called the permanent wilting point. The highest moisture level that a soil can hold against gravity when the excess has drained after saturation is called field capacity. Plant available soil moisture is the water available between the permanent wilting point and field capacity. Irrigation should provide the crop with the right amount of water, when the crop needs it, at the lowest cost and with least impact on the environment. Irrigation scheduling is the process of determining and planning Irrigation is a significant production expense. The maximum economic response to irrigation can only be achieved with a practical and effective scheduling system. Scheduling may be done for any type of irrigation system however, the frequency and amount of water applied will be different, depending on the type of system. Overhead systems apply larger amounts of water less frequently. Soil moisture is allowed to deplete to a critical point generally 50 available soil water between irrigation applications, which allows the plant to experience some stress. When the plant experiences stress, its water use will decrease, as will the yield. Drip irrigation makes the most effective use of irrigation water. It constantly maintains soil moisture near the optimum level generally close to field capacity in some portion of the root zone. Irrigation applications are frequent and small. Soil moisture decreases only slightly before the next application. Plant water use transpiration is kept at a maximum. Water is applied directly to the soil surface or just below the soil surface in the crop row. This greatly reduces evaporation losses compared to overhead irrigation, where water can evaporate before it reaches the crop canopy and can also be lost from the plant and soil surfaces. Properly designed and managed drip systems also generally achieve higher water application uniformity than overhead systems, and once set up are very easy to operate. However, they do require constant maintenance such as checking for leaks, maintaining filters, flushing. No matter the system, maximum water use efficiency can only be achieved with proper design and good irrigation scheduling. With any irrigation system, applying too much water to the soil will result in runoff or loss of water below the root zone. Excess water can also damage crops due to waterlogged soils, ponding, cause loss of soil nutrients through leaching, denitrification and increase soil erosion. With drip systems, over-application may be especially easy to overlook. Soil moisture levels can be monitored and used as the primary method of scheduling irrigation or as a periodic verification of the water budgeting method, to increase operator confidence. The first step is to choose the allowable depletion of soil water in the root zone. For overhead irrigation, the optimal soil moisture range is usually from field capacity 100 available soil moisture down to 50 of available soil moisture, while for drip irrigation the optimal range is from field capacity down to 90 of available soil moisture in the irrigation zone. As mentioned earlier, the soil moisture available to the crop is dependent upon soil texture. Ontario soils can be highly variable in soil texture both across the field surface and at depth. The second step is to use a soil moisture monitoring technique to measure how much water has been depleted. There are two basic ways to monitor soil moisture and adjust irrigation frequency by hand known as the feel method and through instruments inserted in the soil. There are advantages and disadvantages to each technique. Table 3 compares four different methods of measuring soil moisture. Methods may be combined to form a robust scheme for soil moisture monitoring. Many soil moisture monitoring instruments give readings of soil water tension kilopascals or centibars. Figure 4 shows the level of available soil moisture based on the soil water tension for a range of soil textures. When the soil moisture in the root zone is approaching the allowable depletion level 50 for overhead, 10 for drip, an irrigation event is triggered. To determine your available soil moisture, look up your soil texture and soil tension reading on Figure 4. For more information on the soil moisture monitoring approach to irrigation scheduling and how to calculate irrigation amount and duration, see OMAFRAs Best Management Practices Irrigation Management, BMP08. As the name suggests, a water budget is used to track water entering and leaving the system. In a water budget, the crop root zone is visualized as a reservoir of available water. Two things add to the reservoir rainfall and irrigation. Water is removed from the reservoir through crop water consumption. The grower manages the water budget like a bank account. Irrigation and rainfall are deposits to the account, and daily crop water use is a withdrawal from the account. Available soil moisture stored in the root zone represents the balance in the account. Water budget calculations are easy to do on a computer spreadsheet or on paper. You will need the following information Estimate the maximum amount of available water in the tomato root zone. Table 2 gives available water capacity for a range of soil textures. Multiply the available water capacity in inches or centimetres by the rooting depth in the same units to get the maximum total available water. A depth of 45 cm 18 in. is typically used for tomato. This captures most of the active root zone of the crop. Determine the starting moisture level in the root zone. An ideal time to start water budget calculations is after a saturating rainfall, which brings the soil to field capacity. If this is not possible, use the feel method or soil moisture monitoring instrument described above to determine the starting moisture level. When this level is reached, an irrigation is triggered Choose the allowable depletion of soil water. Again, for overhead irrigation, the optimal soil moisture range is from field capacity down to 50 available soil moisture, and for drip irrigation, the optimal range is from field capacity down to 90 of available soil moisture. With this information, you can start the water budget. Each day, measure or calculate how much water is being removed from the soil. The daily water use can be calculated by multiplying the maximum evapotranspiration rate ET by a crop coefficient representing the percent crop cover which reflects the growth stage and growth rate of the crop at that moment. See Table 4 for crop coefficients for tomatoes. ET can be measured with instruments on-site, calculated from climatic data or estimated from a table of historical average ET values see Table 5. For historical average ET values for a number of other locations in Ontario, see OMAFRAs Best Management Practices Irrigation Management, BMP08. Rainfall measurements should be taken near the irrigated fields, since rainfall is highly variable. Keep in mind that a gentle rainfall over a long duration will soak in and replenish soil moisture, while a heavy rainfall of short duration may run off rather than soak into the soil. Ignore rainfall amounts of less than 0.5 cm 0.2 in.. For heavy rains, multiply the rainfall amount by 0.75 before adding it to the water budget, as the effective rainfall that moves into the soil for the plant to use is usually less than the total rainfall. When the allowable soil water depletion level is reached, schedule an irrigation to bring available soil moisture back to 100. At this point, the balance on the water budget is reset to the maximum available soil moisture. Weather forecasts must be watched closely so that irrigation can be stopped before an impending storm. Significant rainfall after an irrigation event can result in excess soil moisture and crop damage. For more detail on the water budget approach to irrigation scheduling and how to calculate irrigation amount and duration, see OMAFRAs Best Management Practices Irrigation Management, BMP08. This fact sheet was authored by Janice LeBoeuf, vegetable crop specialist, OMAFRA, Rebecca Shortt, water quality engineer, OMAFRA, Dr. Chin Tan, researcher, Agriculture  Agri-Food Canada and Anne Verhallen, soil management specialist  horticulture, OMAFRA. Unleashing the potential of Ontarios rural, agriculture and food systems by developing vibrant rural economies, making sure our agriculture is sustainable, and supporting the growth of our agri-food system. There are many ways to contact the Government of Ontario.
Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience. To have a better experience, you need to Were moving content over from an older government website. Well align this page with the ontario.ca style guide in future updates. Learn methods of determining irrigation needs, information about high-volume sprinkler systems and low-volume drip or micro-sprinkler systems and their use in fruit crop production. ISSN 1198-712X, Published April 1990 Adequate soil moisture is required for optimum growth and production of fruit crops. Research has shown that the effect of irrigation on a number of fruit crops can be dramatic. At Harrow, researchers have demonstrated that irrigation not only increases peach yields and improves fruit size, but lengthens peach tree life as well. At Simcoe and Vineland, researchers have also shown that irrigation benefits many crops including apples, grapes, blueberries and pears. The cost of energy for irrigation has been rising steadily. Applying the proper amount of water at the right time is important for reducing costs and maximizing profits. It is essential, therefore, that there be a scientifically sound method for determining when to irrigate and how much water to apply for optimum crop response and efficient use of resources. How can a grower tell when, and when not to irrigate? There are three basic ways. First, you can test the soil with your hands, giving it the feel test to see if the soil feels dry enough to irrigate, or if it feels moist enough to justify holding off for a while. While this feel method is cheap and fast, its accuracy leaves a lot to be desired. Tensiometers provide a second option. These devices measure soil moisture suction and have been tested on a number of Ontario farms. The difficulty in using these devices is that the reading on the device varies with soil type. Tensiometers are better suited for use on sandy soils, where they monitor most of the available moisture range. In heavy soils, large amounts of available moisture occur outside the detection limits of the tensiometer. A third method is the water budget approach. The method is based on climatic data and has the following advantages for scheduling irrigation 1 no equipment requirements 2 accuracy 3 simplicity of use and 4 flexibility allowing easy adaptation for use in other crops. The water budget approach for scheduling irrigation of fruit crops can be broken into several basic steps, which are slightly different for high-volume sprinkler-irrigated orchards than for those where low-volume drip or micro-sprinklers are used. Table 1 gives estimated available water per unit of rooting depth for soils of various textures. Table 2 gives the average rooting depth to which various fruit crops should be irrigated. The total available water is determined by multiplying the appropriate available water value by the average rooting depth. Total available water in the root zone available water mmcm X rooting depth  1.05 mmcm X 60 cm  63 mm Allowable soil water depletion is the portion of the available water in the root zone around 50 that can be extracted without causing adverse effects on tree growth, yield and quality. To estimate allowable soil water depletion, simply multiply available water step 1 by 50. The allowable soil water depletion for the previous example is 31.5 mm 63 mm X 0.5. Table 3 provides information on average daily water use for various fruit crops in southern Ontario as affected by ground cover. The average daily water use rates are derived from long-term average weekly maximum evapotranspiration at Ridgetown, Simcoe and Windsor using various crop factors. For example, the average daily water use rates for peaches are 3.9 and 5.2 mm under clean cultivated and with ground cover, respectively, during the first week of July. If available, the actual daily maximum evapotranspiration should be used to estimate the water use rate of fruit crops for scheduling of irrigation Tan, 1980 Tan and Layne, 1981. 1Derived from average weekly maximum evapotranspiration at Ridgetown, Simcoe and Windsor using various crop factors weekly maximum evapotranspiration data from Treidl, 1979. Crop factor data from Doorenbos and Pruitt, 1975. The starting point for calculating the timing of first spring irrigation is ideally after a thorough wetting of soil by irrigation or heavy rainfall which brings the soil reservoir to field capacity. If this does not occur, the initial amount of available water in the crop root zone must be determined by direct measurement such as tensiometer or oven-dry method. Deciding when to irrigate the fruit crops is determined by subtracting daily water use of crops from total available water in the root zone step 1 until the soil water has been reduced to the allowable depletion level step 2. This procedure is illustrated in Table 4. Soil sandy loam Crop peach tree grown with weeds or ground cover Total available water 63 mm step 1 Allowable soil water depletion 31.5 mm step 2 Irrigation amount  Allowable soil water depletion step 2  Irrigation efficiency Irrigation efficiency varies with size and uniformity of the fields and climatic conditions. Water application may be lost through deep percolation, runoff and evaporation. Well designed and managed sprinkler systems are generally around 75 efficient. Low volume drip or micro-sprinkler systems usually have much higher irrigation efficiency than high-volume sprinkler systems. Application time  Irrigation amount step 5  Application rate The duration of water application depends on the amount of water to be applied step 5 and water intake rate of the soil Table 1. If you have soil that absorbs water slowly select a system that will apply water at a rate low enough to prevent the soil puddling. For example, to apply 42 mm of water for sandy loam soil intake rate 9.5 mmhr, Table 1, the application time should not be less than 4 hours Table 4. The same amount of water applied to a clay soil intake rate 3.5 mmhr, Table 1 will take about 12 hours. Daily water requirements for various fruit crops may be estimated from Table 3. However, with localized irrigation, it is more convenient to calculate water use rate as litres per tree per day than mm per day. Use the following equation for this conversion LPD    N where LPD  Litres per tree per dayET  Average daily water use rate mm  See Table 3 10 000  Factor to convert hectare-mm to litres per hectare N  number of trees per hectare AC  Area of shade per hectare, expressed in decimals. Tree ages older than 6 years are considered as a mature bearing orchard. The value of AC equals 1. Tree ages from 1 to 5 years are considered as a non-bearing orchard. Use the following equation for ACAC    10 000 whereDS  diameter m of shade cast by tree at noon0.7854  Constant to calculate area10000  Factor to convert hectare to square meter How often you irrigate is related to several factors system design, tree daily water requirements, number of emitters per tree and emitter flow rate. Most low-volume drip systems are designed to operate dailyand to deliver just enough water to meet the maximum daily tree water use demands. The practice is based on the concept that optimum plant growth may be achieved through preventing moisture stress, by maintaining ideal soil moisture conditions in the tree root zone. Water is applied at low pressure 104 to 138 kPa or 15 to 20 psi and at slow rates 4.5 to 9 litres or 1 to 2 gallons per hour per emitter for sufficient periods of time to maintain the soil at or near field capacity. Many types of low-volume micro-sprinkler systems wet large portions of the orchard soil surface. By taking full advantage of the moisture holding capacity of the volume of soil within the tree root zone, this type of water application will usually meet a 2 or 3 day tree water requirement, resulting in greater flexibility in irrigation. Irrigation frequency for micro-sprinkler systems can be calculated as follows Irrigation frequency  In the soil root zone  Daily water use LPD whereLPD  Litres per tree per day see step 1 Total usable water in the soil root zone litres  Total usable water per meter of soil depth x total soil root zone reservoir x AC x 1000 litresm3 Total usable water per meter of soil depth m waterm soil  average available water capacity mm watercm soil Table 1 X percent allowable soil water depletion X 0.1 Total soil root zone reservoir m3  area of wetting m2 X irrigation depth m Table 2  DM2 x 0.7854 x irrigation depth whereDM  diameter m of spray for micro-sprinklerAC  area of shade per hectare, expressed in decimals see step 11000  Factor to convert cubic meter to litres0.1  Factor to convert mm watercm soil to m waterm soil The type of soil sandy, loamy or clay will affect the numbers, spacing, and flow rate of emitters. Sandy soils will accept water at a higher rate than loamy or clay soils therefore, the emitter flow rate may be higher with a shorter operation time. The lateral movement of water for sandy soils will also be less than loamy or clay soils. To compensate for this, emitters usually have to be placed close to trees grown in sandy soils. Clay soils will require a low emitter flow rate to allow for slower infiltration without leaving free water standing on the surface. Water application amounts depend on the daily tree water use rate, the irrigation frequency and the application efficiency. Low volume drip irrigation systems are generally 100 efficient. Low-volume micro-sprinkler systems are around 90 to 95 efficient. Irrigation amount   x irrigation frequency The duration of water application depends on the amount of water to be applied step 3, and the irrigation system application rate. The water application rate can be calculated based on the average discharge rate per emitter or micro-sprinkler and number of emitters per tree. Application time  Irrigation amount  Application rate x number of emitter Step 1. The average daily water use rate ET for peaches under groundcover during the first week in July is 5.2 mmday Table 3. Number trees per hectare N  10 000 m2ha    586 treesha AC    10 000   10 0000.18 LPD    N   58615.97 Step 2. Irrigation frequency  every day for low-volume drip systems Step 3. Irrigation amount    Application efficiency   x 1 day 15.97 litres Step 4. Application time  Irrigation amount  Application rate  Irrigation amount  15.97 litres    1.78 hr Irrigation schedule every day Irrigation amount 15.97 litres Application time 1.78 hr Step 1. LPD  15.97 same as example 1 Step 2. Irrigation frequency  Total usable water in the soil root zone  Daily water use rate LPD Average available water capacity for loamy sand 0.85 mmcm Table 1 Total usable water per meter of soil depth average available water capacity x percent allowable soil water depletion x 0.1 0.85 mmcm x 0.25 x 0.1  0.0213 mm Area of wetting  DM2 x 0.7854  4 m2 x 0.7854  12.57 m2 Rooting depth depth to irrigate 60 cm  0.6 m Table 2 Total soil root zone reservoir area of wetting x rooting depth 12.57 m2 o 0.6 m  7.54 m3 Total usable water for 2-year-old tree at 60 cm soil root zone  0.0213 mm x 7.54 m3 x 0.18 x 1000 litresm3  28.91 litres Therefore Irrigation frequency  28.91 litres  15.97 litresday 1.8 days Step 3. Irrigation amount   x 1.8 days  31.9 litres Step 4. Application time  31.9 litres  27 litreshr  1.18 hr Irrigation schedule every 2nd day Irrigation amount 31.9 litres Application time 1.18 hr Step 1. LPD    N    586 88.74 Step 2. Irrigation frequency  Total usable water in the soil root zone  Daily water use rate LPD Average available water capacity for loamy sand 0.85 mmcm Table 1 Total usable water per meter of soil depth 0.0213 mm see example 2 Area of wetting  12.57 m2 see example 2 Total soil root zone reservoir  7.54 m3 see example 2 Total usable water for 7-year-old tree at 60 cm soil root zone litres  Total usable water per meter of soil depth x total soil root zone reservoir x AC x 1000 litresm3  0.0213 mm x 7.54 m3 x 1 x 1000 litresm3  160.6 litres Therefore Irrigation frequency  160.6 litres  1.8 days 88.74 litresday Step 3. Irrigation amount   x 1.8 days  177.48 litres Step 4. Application time  177.48 litres  27 litreshr  6.57 hr Irrigation schedule every 2nd day Irrigation amount 177.48 litres Application time 6.57 hr Unleashing the potential of Ontarios rural, agriculture and food systems by developing vibrant rural economies, making sure our agriculture is sustainable, and supporting the growth of our agri-food system. There are many ways to contact the Government of Ontario.
Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience. To have a better experience, you need to Were moving content over from an older government website. Well align this page with the ontario.ca style guide in future updates. Understand the impact of heat stress on beef cattle and management tips to minimize the effect. ISSN 1198-712X, Published November 2006 During the summer months, heat stress in cattle can result in poor animal performance. Hot, humid weather creates dangerous conditions for all livestock, particularly heavy-fed cattle. Dark-coloured beef cattle on a high-energy diet, carrying lots of body condition, will be the first affected by heat and humidity. Be aware of heat stress and what to do about it. Use the cattle and water management tips below to help minimize the impact of heat stress on cattle. Accessible description of Figure 1 Note Wetting cattle or pen surfaces may require an additional 38 L 10 gal of wateranimalday or more! Do you have a large enough supply of water to do this? Chart indicating correlation between relative humidity and temperature. High temperature levels and high relative humidity indicates producers should be cautious. At very high levels of either temperature or relative humidity producers are warned to watch cattle closely for signs of heat stress and stroke. Unleashing the potential of Ontarios rural, agriculture and food systems by developing vibrant rural economies, making sure our agriculture is sustainable, and supporting the growth of our agri-food system. There are many ways to contact the Government of Ontario.
Ontario.ca needs JavaScript to function properly and provide you with a fast, stable experience. To have a better experience, you need to Learn about daily livestock watering needs when designing a livestock watering system. This technical information is for Ontario livestock producers. ISSN 1198-712X, Published January 2023 Providing enough quality water is essential for good livestock husbandry. Water makes up 80 of the blood, regulates body temperature and is vital for organ functions such as digestion, waste removal and the absorption of nutrients. Understanding daily livestock watering needs is key when designing a livestock watering system. The daily water requirement of livestock varies significantly among animal species. The animals size and growth stage will have a strong influence on daily water intake. Consumption rates can be affected by environmental and management factors. Air temperature, relative humidity and the level of animal exertion or production level are examples of these factors. The quality of the water, which includes temperature, salinity and impurities affecting taste and odour, will also have an effect. The water content of the animals diet will influence its drinking habits. Feed with a relatively high moisture content decreases the quantity of drinking water required. Given that drinking water needs are species-, farm- and management-specific, many producers are opting to install water-metering equipment to obtain accurate measurements of water use. If medication is provided through the livestocks watering system, the meter can ensure proper dose rates. Milk is composed of nearly 87 water. An adequate supply of quality water for dairy cattle is extremely important. Farmers provide cows with free access to fresh water at all times. The water requirements of lactating cows are closely related to milk production, moisture content in the feed and environmental factors such as air temperature and humidity. The cows peak water intake generally occurs during the hours of greatest feed intake. Table 1 identifies water use by major growth stage of a dairy animal and breaks down the estimated water consumption of a milking cow by its level of milk production. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. footnote cThe average milk production in 2006 for a Holstein dairy cow in Ontario was 33 kgday. footnote dApproximately 15 of the milking-age cows present on a dairy farm could be considered dry. Some studies suggest the water requirement of beef cattle is closely tied to whether the animals are lactating, the moisture content of their feed ration and environmental factors such as air temperature and relative humidity. Grazing trials have demonstrated that weight gains of pastured beef animals are higher if a water supply is provided for the cattle in the grazing area, even though the animals are receiving a lot of water from their diet. Table 2 identifies average daily water requirements of beef cattle. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. The housing method, growth stage and feeding method used affect the drinking water requirements of pigs. Table 3 gives a breakdown of drinking water consumption by weight range or level of maturity. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. footnote eIncludes unweaned piglets. The introduction of three-site production and all-inall-out facilities has altered water usage patterns and peak usage requirements of swine in growout facilities. Pigs in the growing phase are often grouped in segregated rooms or entire barns by age. They are kept in this facility until the target weight is reached by the majority of animals, when the room or barn is emptied and then restocked. For example, consider that 500 23-kg 50-lb pigs at the start of a growout cycle will each consume 4.5 Lday. By the end of the growout cycle, the water requirements of these 500 pigs, now weighing 100 kg 220 lb, will have doubled to 9 Lday each. Design the water system for these pigs for the higher value. The use of wetdry feeders and liquid feeding systems has reduced the volume of drinking water required because of the higher moisture content in the feed ration and the reduction in spillage of water from these systems. Prior to 1990, it was estimated that approximately 50 of the water supplied to a hog pen in a day was lost as spillage. Today, more efficient feeding systems have cut these losses significantly. Producers have also opted to replace the nipple drinkers in the pen with water bowltype drinkers. Horses typically consume 23 kg of water per kilogram of dry feed. They drink more in hot weather and while doing strenuous exercise Table 4. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. Grazing sheep, particularly in the cooler seasons of the year, require relatively little additional water beyond what they receive through forage. Hot, drier weather will result in increased water intake. Table 5 provides an estimate of water consumed daily by different categories of sheep. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. The feed requirements of growing poultry are directly related to bird weight. Water requirements are related to feed consumption and to the air temperature. Over half of the water intake of poultry is obtained from the feed. Automatic watering equipment ensures poultry have free access to water at all times. Once air temperatures exceed 30C or 87F, the expected water consumption can increase by 50 above normal consumption rates. Poultry are unable to sweat as a means of regulating body temperature. Their method of heat control involves increasing the respiratory rate panting to expel surplus heat, which results in the release of large amounts of moisture that must be replaced, or the bird will become dehydrated. Table 6 shows an estimate of the daily water consumption of 1,000 broiler chickens at different stages of growth. It also illustrates the effect air temperature can have on their water consumption rates. Use Table 6 to design water systems for broilers. Table 7 shows water consumption by season and can be used for estimating average total annual water requirement for broilers. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. Table 8 presents an estimate of daily water consumption by other common classes of chickens. Again, temperatures have a major influence on the water consumption rate expected from these other poultry classes. Egg production level will also affect the water consumption of laying hens. It is estimated that laying hens will drink about 4 kg of water per dozen eggs produced. footnote aA result of the animals environment and management. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. Historically, most producers used the bell-style watering system  a circular trough with a gravity-fed reservoir that is connected to a water line  to provide water to growing birds. Advances in poultry watering equipment has introduced a nipple-style watering device that contributes to drinker hygiene and reduces water spillage if properly managed. For cage-reared poultry, such as laying hens, producers are using a cup water device or a trough under the water nipples Figure 1 in order to reduce water wastage. Drinking water requirements of turkeys are shown in Tables 9 and 10. Use Table 9 for designing water system capacity and Table 10 for estimating average total annual consumption. Water consumption is significantly influenced by the birds size and the air temperature it is exposed to. The age of turkeys on a farm will depend heavily on market factors. Meat turkeys are classified as Water consumption of breeding hens kept for egg production is similar to that of heavy hens at 16 weeks. footnote fIncludes spillage losses typically 2 or less of total consumption. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. Limited observed and published data are available for less common livestock. The data presented in Table 11 are general numbers based on estimates provided by producers and extension specialists who work with these alternate livestock. As with other animals, the key factors affecting water intake are likely to be feed intake, feed composition, environmental temperature, animal size and activity. footnote bTypical consumption over a year on a daily basis under average agricultural conditions in Ontario. footnote gTotal weight 4.5 kg for doe plus 8 kits at 0.5 kg The most important factor affecting rabbits water intake is environmental temperature. They will drink twice as much water during hot summer weather 30C 86F as they will during more temperate seasons 10C 50F. Rabbits on high-fibre or highprotein diets will tend to drink more water than rabbits on low-fibre or low-protein rations. The high-fibre diets require extra water to moisten the feed and to maintain adequate fluid level in the digestive tract. High-protein rations increase the water requirement because nitrogen from the excess protein is excreted in the urine as urea. The kidney has a limited capacity to concentrate excretory byproducts in the urine, so the more urea excreted by the animal, the more water there is in the urine. Similar variables affect a minks water requirements. Mink are traditionally fed a wet diet 6575 water, which will provide 8085 of the minks daily water requirements. The remaining water needs must be met by drinking water. While the focus of this fact sheet is on the quantity of water consumed by livestock, water quality is also important to consider, as it has an impact on the volume of water consumed. Foul odours or tastes, for example, may discourage animals from drinking. Depending on the cause, poor water quality can affect herd health, possibly leading to animal death and economic loss to the producer. Assess water quality at both the point of use and the source. The contamination of watering devices by dust, spilled feed and fecal matter can lead to the growth of slime. Eventually slime organisms die and decay, creating foul odour andor tastes. Poultry is more sensitive to the taste and mineral content of the water than other livestock types. Water treatment systems are increasingly being used in poultry barns. The treatments normally focus on overcoming many problems with iron or minerals in the source water, killing bacteria and eliminating slimescale from forming in the water lines and on the waterer. If chlorine is added during treatment, the target residual chlorine level in the delivery system is between 35 parts per million. The tolerance to minerals total salts in water supplies varies by animal species, with poultry being most sensitive, hogs moderately sensitive and ruminant animals least sensitive. In general, a total soluble salt content of less than 1,000 mgL is considered a low level of salinity suitable for all types of livestockfootnote 13. Salt contents between 1,000 mgL and 3,000 mgL are satisfactory for all types of livestock but may cause watery droppings in poultry or diarrhea in livestock not accustomed to this salt level. Salt levels above 3,000 mgL are not recommended for poultry and are more likely to result in cases of livestock refusalfootnote 13. Salt levels above 5,000 mgL are not recommended for lactating animals. Avoid levels above 7,000 mgL for all livestock. Understanding daily livestock watering needs and providing quality water is key when designing a livestock watering system to optimize animal health. This fact sheet was written by Daniel Ward, poultry and other livestock  housing and equipment engineer, Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs OMAFRA and Kevin McKague, water quality engineer, OMAFRA. Unleashing the potential of Ontarios rural, agriculture and food systems by developing vibrant rural economies, making sure our agriculture is sustainable, and supporting the growth of our agri-food system. There are many ways to contact the Government of Ontario.
